# It's like stasis, but without the peace

It feels like the last three weeks have mostly involved being in suspended animation. I didn't have internet at home, and since my work involved so much programming lately the last thing I wanted to do when I got home was program more.

Most of the time I just wanted to sleep...

As a result I'm taking tomorrow off to do absolutely nothing at all, so that I'm "fresh" for the weekend and can do the sequence programming that still needs to be done. I realised that it would be silly to do the sequence abstraction without 'unifying' the kanji decompositions 
(It's visually obvious that 艮 and 即 have a similar component, but you wouldn't know from the decompositions because they're listed as individual strokes), so I'll need to write a utility that does what is essentially a refactoring-with-macro-replacements for me, and then verify that the refactoring went well.

Not very fun, certainly not a way "forward" (unless you count circumspecting), but it has to be done. Not looking forward to it, but there you have it. Even your own hobbies can be excruciating >_>

On a different note, I am looking into getting a commercial license for the <a href="http://www2.nict.go.jp/r/r312/EDR/index.html" target="_blank">EDR</a>, as a data replacement for edict on nihongoresources.

Upside: really good J/E and E/J dictionary data with jargon as well as co-occurence data for both Japanese and English. This data is made of pure awesome.

Downside: a price tag of 19.2 million yen. 

Don't worry, I'm not going to ask you to pitch in (unless you're wealthy!), but I would like some input. I was going to petition various large companies with an affinity or market segment in the japanese language area, and my list currently consists of the following big ones:

<ul>
<li>HP</li>
<li>Sharp</li>
<li>Sony</li>
<li>Casio</li>
<li>Canon</li>
<li>Citizen</li>
<li>Microsoft</li>
</ul>

If you can think of one that isn't in this list, please leave a comment (no, you don't need to register to comment) and hopefully I can grow the list a little so that asking for about 200,000 euro (cost of the EDR   my expenses and work fee) will result in small sponsor sums from each.

And now, it's time to head home and see if I can stay awake through dinner... >_>