# Hackable games at the Mozilla Festival

I've been working at the Mozilla Foundation for a few months, initially rolling into what became the webmaker.org <A href="http://thimble.webmaker.org">Thimble</a> tool. The project was an attempt to make it super easy to learn HTML and CSS by showing people both the code and the page it built, side by side. The idea was that this would allow people to "remix" the web, using the internet as a source for creativity, rather than as a passively consumed medium. We had a lot of positive feedback on it, and several partners helped create some really fun and great projects that people could do using the Thimble tool, easing people into the idea of changing a webpage to be what they want it to be, before giving them an empty Thimble page where they can make whatever they want, not bound by any predfined template other than the minimal HTML code required to define "a page".

The idea of Thimble fits nicely into the "What if we had a giant 'remix' button for everything on the web?" question that underpins the webmaker philosophy. What if, while watching a youtube video, you could right click and select "view source", to see all the timing events, overlays, captions, what-have-you's? What if, while playing a web-based game, you could do the same, and see all the object definitions, and the game logic, and level design? What would something like that even look like? What would you expect to be able to do? What would you WANT to do?

For video, there is the amazing <a href="http://popcorn.webmaker.org">"Popcorn Maker"</a>, which has just reached its 1.0 release, and lets you remix videos on the web in a way that used to be reserved only for people willing to learn how to use very specific video editing tools. It's the "remix button" for youtube, vimeo, etc., letting you create your own videos by pulling in data and information from as many sources as you want, while keeping everything understandable. And preserving the remixable nature of your mix when you decide to unleash your creative awesomebomb onto the web by publishing it through webmaker -- incidentally, if you haven't had a look at it yet, I strongly recommend that you do =)

For games, things are less clear. There are as many ways to program "a game" as there are actual games, and even on the web there are myriad technologies that are currently used to deploy games. From HTML and JavaScript to Flash/Silverlight to Java Applets and WebStart applications to even things like thin clients that basically turn the browser into just a monitor with an input device for sending control signals to a remote server that's actually running the game. When there's a million-and-one approaches to making games, how do you even begin to come up with a way to remix all these things?

Rather than trying to figure out a universal answer, we decided to focus on what makes a game "remixable" or "hackable". What would you need to do, in order to write games that are inherently "hackable"? Think of the concept of modding, where game publishers deliver not just "the game", but also an extensive system for changing the look and feel, or even the mechanics, of the game that you bought. Blizzard has an excellent track record for this with titles like "World of Warcraft" and "StarCraft", and many RTS games, such as the "Command and Conquer" series, offer similar functionality - but what would you need to do to make this something that simply comes naturally as part of open, "webby" games?

Ideally, hackable games are games that are made just like any other, but with a tool chain that simply bakes in the hackability. In an ideal world, the game developers don't notice a difference, but the game that comes rolling out is simply hackable because "that's what games are". It's a bit like how we think about web pages these days - If I browse a website and it's white text on a black background, I can just change the colors so that it's dark text on a light background instead. I don't need access to the webserver and the original files, I can just make a change in my browser when I need, or want to. What if, in a hypothetical futures where "hackable games" is an established concept, playing a game like "Modern Warfare" or "Paper Mario" with your friends and going "hey, let's change the gameplay" is as obvious and trivial an idea as saying "hey, let's play a different game"? 

In the mean time we're still in a place where the answer "what makes a hackable game" remains largely unanswered. So to get the ball rolling, we looked at the tools we already had: HTML, CSS, JavaScript, Thimble, and free assets from places like <a href="opengameart.org">opengameart.org</a> and <a href="freesound.org">freesound.org</a>. With the Mozilla Festival fast approaching, we wanted to come up with something that would demonstrate the ideas of a hackable game, without making things completely inaccessible for people who "just want to change something". We're not all game developers, but we all have our own ideas of what would make a game better, or more fun, or different and interesting. Not all remixes are code hacks, some are as simple as asset changes, or a small change to a game mechanic by changing a few game parameters, so we wanted something that wasn't necessarily done, but was good enough to let people play with it and get an idea of what hackable games might be.

So, for the Mozilla Festival, we settled on making a "pure" HTML game: we created an HTML version of the immortal <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pong">"Pong"</a> game, using <a href="https://code.google.com/p/box2dweb/">box2dweb.js</a> for the physics, and HTML elements as our world objects, so that the entire thing is a webpage; walls, paddles, balls, everything is divs with classes that our physics code can simply look at and go "I see this div is of class 'ball', I'll just tie 'ball physics' to this element". If you have no programming experience, or a desire to learn to program, you can still play with the HTML and CSS and tweak your game to suit your taste.

Because it's a webpage, all the styling is achieved through CSS. The Pong game is extremely easy to "skin"; you can change the colors or use image art; We have several data-[...] attributes for tweaking things like gravity, object density and bounciness, friction, key based interaction, etc. Things you might normally tweak through code, we added as live parameters. Change the HTML source code, and the changes take effect in the webpage preview. It's a bit like a live coding environment, with a focus on experimenting more than just "learning how to do X". It has to be fun first, and educational second. Done right, the second is simply a happy side-effect of the first.

For people who want to do more elaborate tweaks, we have "onbounce", "onmousedown", and "onmouseup" event handlers for introducing and manipulated (limited) game mechanics, such as removing things from the game world (based on CSS selectors), keeping score, playing audio files using HTML5 <audio> elements, and changing object speeds and direction.

To test how robust our idea was, we remixed our own Pong game so that it became an <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arkanoid">"Arkanoid"</a> game instead, with the right paddle changed into some thirty-odd small "wall" divs that disappeared on an onbounce event.

If you're a game developer, this might all sound trivial, but if you've only ever enjoyed games solely as a player, the idea that you can simply go in and change the game to do what *you* want, rather than what the game developer thought you should want, can actually be very empowering. It's the difference between being a consumer and a creator. We don't magically stop being consumers, but gaining the ability to create and manipulate is an incredibly enriching experience. Even if you rarely ever exercise it, knowing that you could change something if you wanted to is already empowering.

<h2>Running our session</h2>

We had the good fortune of quasi-co-hosting our session (which spanned both days) with a session run by the people from Babycastles, who were doing a "build a one-button arcade cabinet", which gave us the opportunity to give people more than just games to hack on: if they felt up to the task, they could also design a game that had a single button for user input (in our case, onmousedown and onmouseup) which could then be used in the arcade cases that were building built at the same time.

Thanks to MozFest's incredible number of attendants this year (1000 people!) we had a good mix of skills and ages, ranging from people without any programming or HTML/CSS knowledge whatsoever to developers, with age ranges between 12 and 50 (rough estimate =), and it was really interesting to see the different approaches that people took to "hacking up" the games.

We had a class of secondary school children, who had zero HTML and CSS experience, started playing with the games, focussing on making "Pong" their own game, learning how to work with CSS styling as something that allowed them to customize their games. They minimally changed the game mechanics, working in two groups, with one group producing a space-themed pong, where the ball slowly speeds up as it bounces around, and the second group producing a very hard game with paddles closer to the center, and two balls that speed up a lot as they bounce around. It took them maybe 15 to 30 minutes to understand that there was a difference between HTML and CSS, and that you changed the look and feel mostly through CSS rather than the HTML, but after that they were off doing their own thing, developing as a group with one person behind the keyboard and several others looking on, saying what to try next. 

It was great to see a bunch of kids come in, listen to the pitch, skeptically poke and prod the thing a little, and then just run away with it. I think this is a clear sign that we're tapping into something good here.

We also had a group of adults interested in hackable games, who ended up working in groups as well, working together to create one button games, with different people working on different aspects - people with no or little HTML experience worked on the look and feel, playing with CSS and doing paper design, while people with programming experience started to modify the game logic to enable more elaborate games, injecting JavaScript code and radically altering the game behaviour because even though our physics engine had some built-in functionality, it couldn't do something, but they had the skills to change it, and the hackable games version of Thimble let them. A particularly nice result was a "build a hamburger" game where a hamburger, consisting of a bun with three ingredients, had the bottom part of a bun as "paddle", and the player had to collect the ingredients and top bun in the correct order as they fell down. As a one-button game, you couldn't directly move the "paddle" left or right, but rather it went back and forth between the side walls on its own, and a mouse click would reverse its direction.

If watching kids run away with the hackable games concept was great, seeing adults make their own thing with a minimal setup was equally inspiring, and I think it shows (once again) that creativity just needs a way to be expressed. Even if the tools are far from perfect, being able to tinker and fiddle and create something fun is infinitely preferable to not having that option.

The thing I really liked about this was that people with zero experience in web making were able to, with minimal help, go from "user" to "maker" in under an hour. The fact that they were hacking games made the exercise fun, but the tools they used also taught them a little bit about webmaking in general. I love this concept of "people learning something because it allows them to do some other thing". Learning HTML and CSS can be useful, but if you learn it because it is a means to an end, rather than an end in and of itself, the learning is that much more powerful.

<h2>Where do we go from here?</h2>

It's been interesting to see people playing with the notion of hackable games, and making something that enables people to express themselves creatively through a hackable game has been insightful, but there's a lot of exploration left: "real" webby games, as made by game developers who are serious about releasing a game, won't be made using Thimble. As a first, small attempt, these hackable games were great, but we've only dipped our proverbial toes in the ocean of hackable games, and there's a long walk left. It's getting exciting.

There are two things that I took home from our hackable games experiment:

  1) "If you need it to do something fun, you'll learn how to do it". This is kind of an obvious thing, but seeing it in action again is a great reminder that we're not "teaching people HTLM and CSS", we're turning them into webmakers, and HTML and CSS, as well as JavaScript, are means to that end. Having tweakable/hackable/remixable HTML-based games available for people to have fun with gives us another way to engage and motivate future webmakers.

  2) "We need more implementations of tools that enable hackable games". Thimble projects are a great way to engage the newcomers, but you don't win over the tech crowd with tools they will never use. If we want to entertain the idea of hackable games as a given in a future webmaking world, then we should engage amateur and professional developers using their own tools, either extended or hooked into in such a way that creating an inherently hackable game is no more work than creating the games they do today. How can we do that? No idea, so let's find out!

I had a lot of fun during MozFest, and I think the most important thing to do, now that we have some time for evaluation, is to sit down and figure out where to take the notion of hackable games in the immediate future, as well as what kind of goals (and I want to stress the plural form there) we want to achieve long term. It seems to me that hackable games in Thimble is a major winner for the overall webmaker idea, but our hackable games session at MozFest is the intersection of a two circle Venn diagram, with the "webmaker" and "hackable games" circles meeting at Thimble... in the same way that there's more to webmaker than just Thimble, there's definitely more to hackable games, too. It's time to find out how much more complex that diagram is!
