Electronic devices contain components that contain the [magical smoke](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magic_smoke) that makes everything work, and once it's released, things no longer work. Usually, you will not run into this unless you're doing some extremely taxing work (like making a low-end consumer scanner run for hours on end), but even then usually a device will shut down before it gets to smoke-ejecting levels of bad.

Not so in this case. I was copying about 55GB of data from my Macbook Pro (a lovely older gen. matte display 17", because I want a laptop with a huge screen) when after 20GB of running there was suddenly the distinct smell of magic. Followed by the screen freezing in all the colours of the rainbow (plus a few that aren't in the rainbow), followed by death.

Booting it would produce the typical "dvd drive initialisation + mac sound byte" noises, but the screen was properly dead. In fact, not only was the screen dead, but the display port also didn't work. Thankfully, it's not one of those fused-body newer macs, so I could actually just open it up and take out the HD to see if that was broken, and as it turns out: that part's fine! Also, encrypted with FileVault2, which means that it's extremely difficult to get the data off.

After trying a few things involving USB adapters, it turns out that the "use another Mac" idea when you don't have another Mac, but you do own [VMWare Workstation](http://www.vmware.com/products/workstation) actually gives you a way to do exactly what's necessary to recover your files. Provided you're willing to momentarily choose common sense over EULAs and grab an OSX 10.8 premade VM from the internet.

Running the VM with the Mac's hard disk hooked into my regular computer allowed me to add it as a secondary HD (but only if added as IDE, not SCSI, for some interesting reason), which inside the VM showed up as an encrypted disk that could be unlocked with a simple typing of the password for it. Presto, file access! Except not quite because there's no way to get the data from the OSX VM into the host OS (in this case, windows 7). So in order to rescue the data, I had to first copy it from the Mac HD into the VM's virtual drive, and then replace the Mac HD with an empty 80GB SSD I have lying around for these kind of "I need to move more than a USB stick's worth of data from machine X to machine Y" jobs.

After turning off the OSX VM, removing the HD binding for the Mac HD, and adding a new HD binding for the 80GB SSD, connected via USB (again as an IDE hd, not SCSI), and turning the OSX VM back on, means I'm now copying the rescued data over to a disk that can be connected to any other machine without any weird filevault2 restrictions, and it's game on!

Although of course my Macbook Pro is still broken so I need a new one =(