[Nihongoresources.com](http://nihongoresources.com) runs on PHP. I'm not proud of that, but I'm also not ashamed of it: it was born when Perl was a popular language, and went big-site in the golden days of PHP. Those days are gone, and the hot ticket is JavaScript, but until a few weeks ago, my PHP sites were simply things that worked.

That is, however, no longer the case. PHP has been moving forward and is slowly dropping old APIs and libraries, one consequence of which is that MySQL interfacing has radically changed since I made the site and I was faced with a choice: either actively update the site to a modern design, or have it stop being useful because PHP no longer supports the kind of code that was written back in the day.

So what to do?

Two words: REST APIs. Okay so that's actually six words, but it's two abbreviations  and that works too; instead of trying to update the PHP code to modern PHP, I'm going the way of the outsource. I've spent the last week writing up the [Nihongoresources REST API](http://api.nihongoresources.com) which can take care of all the data searching without being, strictly speaking, technology dependent. Right now it's implemented in JavaScript, using [Node.js](http://nodejs.org), but the important part is that it's just a set of URLs that you can call to get search results back. Whether that's serviced by Node.js's JavaScript, or PHP, or Haskell, or whatever is the next shiny tasty web backend language, doesn't really matter all that much.

So rather than trying to get Nihongoresources' codebase up to snuff, I can now start to remove PHP. As anyone working on code and especially in Open Source will tell you, patches with more deletions than additions are good, and here, especially, it's excellent. Instead of having a database generator running to create search pages, I can do away with the complex bits of code, and instead set up some simple "looks the same" html with some client-side [xhr](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XMLHttpRequest) JavaScript to get the search results from the API service point, and nihongoresources.com itself will never have to bother with this again.

Hurray!