You run an open source project, and I have a meaningful contribution for you. I'd love to submit it, but now you're asking me for my personal information, without ever having shown that you can be trusted with that: I'm not signing your CLA.

You may have seen articles of the "I will not sign your NDA" variety popping up in your newsfeeds every now and then, and this post is in the same vein. I will not sign your CLA, and there's a very good reason for it.

You probably have a cool project, and it was born out of some bigger effort, or you happen to work closely with a bigger effort. For instance, you're the  [polymer](polymer-project.org) or [KaTeX](ttps://github.com/Khan/KaTeX) project, and your code is really quite cool, and really quite useful, and I'm not even being sarcastic here, I love both those projects. But the companies you work(ed) for know the troubles of contributors demands post-patch-acceptance, and they, or their lawyers, made you add a wholly unreasonable CLA to your project.

Let's make this clear: I know what kind of shit storm can take place without a CLA. This is not a post about how "you should not have to worry about this", because it's a very real thing; nor is this a post about how "you shouldn't have a CLA, ever", because CLAs make sense for projects where an individual can properly ruin the party for many, many people. Chromium needs a CLA. The Firefox codebase needs a CLA. Twitter, Facebook, Kahn Academy, Google, all of those requiring you sign a CLA to work on their projects **as part of their product offerings** are fine.

But don't act bigger than you are. Asking people to tell you their name, phone number, and real world address, is kind of a big deal: what are you going to do with that information? How do I know you're not lying when you tell me it's only for legal purposes? What have you done to deserve my faith in you? What have you done to show none of your project members have access to that information? Because if I have a twitter spat with someone, they sure as hell shouldn't have the power to look up my phone number and home address in a CLA registry. And what have you done to show that the information you're asking for is even meaningful?

There are reasons I won't sign a CLA for Google or Facebook: they haven't earned my trust. Kind of the opposite, really, I trust them to abuse my personal information for as many dollars as they can get out of it. However, I will happily sign a CLA with Mozilla, or the Red Cross, because they've shown they can be trusted with this kind of information.

Bottom line: I don't trust you. If you were a project born out of a Google idea and now you're on your own and you have nothing to do with actual Google projects (I'm looking at you, Polymer) or you're a Kahn Academy project that is being spun as a replacement for MathJax, not tied into the Kahn Academy codebase at all (I'm looking at you, KaTeX), then you are no longer Google or Kahn Academy. You're projects without the authority of your parent to back you up, and you're new on the open source map. I haven't heard anything bad about what you do with identity information from real human beings, but then I've heard nothing good, either: I don't trust you, because I don't think it's unrealistic we're going to disagree on something in an issue I file, and I don't think it's unrealistic to imagine tempers might flare and someone's going to end up looking up my personal information and take things offline. I fully imagine that to be imaginary, but this is the real world, and you're asking for real, personally identifiable information. You need to earn the right to ask for that that; you don't have that right just because you're an open source project.

Can you explain why you need my name, my phone number, and my real world address? "The lawyers said it was okay" is not a good enough answer. What if I have no phone? I actually don't, I have no use for one. What if I have no permanent address? I actually do, but I know people wo don't, and you can't read hacker news without hitting an article about people working out of coffee shops with $2500 macbooks but no permanent address fairly often. Can you explain why you're discriminating against people in this way? Because it's kind of bizarre, but there it is: your CLA is discriminating again those less well off. Kind of generally the kind of people who benefit most from open source projects (note: "most"; people with phones and permanent addresses obviously benefit from open source, but the less you have, the more important freely accessible tools are)

For what a CLA was originally intended for, it has to discriminate at least enough to identify you as the person you claim to be, but if your project is not the used-by-millions powerhouse of a Discourse or Elasticsearch, your use of a CLA is not about making sure a patch is legally safe to merge in. You're just doing what you've been told without asking whether that even made sense and fighting for open source. You're actually making open source feel worse by pretending we all need to sign these things before we can even contribute code and help build a better world. And ironically, the CLA, designed to make sure patches can be landed, actually sets an artificial bar for what you consider a worthy contributor. When you look at it that way, and I so very much do, it's kind of sad and sickening and I don't understand why you're denigrating people by insisting on a nonsense agreement for which I could make up random numbers and letters and you will not even question it because you have no way of verifying the information short of sending someone to the address I give you and calling the phone number I provided. To which I can claim to never be home, and that I changed phone numbers since signing that CLA.

In the end, that CLA is *your* insurance against *me* not liking how you run your small project... so let's get real: we could have settled that issue with a single-line agreement that says "by contributing you sign over all transferable rights pertaining to your contribution to this project" and done. I don't trust you, and your CLA just told me you don't trust me either.

Yeah, I think we're off to a great start.