Two weeks ago we hosted [MozFest 2014](http://2014.mozillafestival.org) in London (UK, not Ontario), with lots of [appmaker](http://apps.webmaker.org) related sessions, including a weekend long "introduction to appmaker" that I ran with the help of the wonderful [Becky Weir](https://twitter.com/McBeckster), and it was great to see people going from "I have no idea what this is" to "I am remixing apps for giggles" and "I have an idea for an app, let me try to make it".  MozFest 2014 was the first big event that had the current version of Appmaker in the hands of the public, so it was a good time to see what worked, and what didn't.

### What worked

It's easy to imagine that it's important to have some fun components as well as some tedious logics components for apps while you're developing software like this, but it's not until you ask people to play with it that you realise exactly *how* important it is to have fun components. A few weeks before MozFest, [Scott Downe](http://scottdowne.wordpress.com) had made a simple top-down 2d game level brick, as well as a retro-looking game controller brick, and while those were fun to play with, it wasn't until he and Becky [wrote some tutorials on how to use them](https://scott.makes.org/thimble/LTE4NzA1MjgyNTY=/mozfest-appmaker-games) that it was obvious exactly how important these bricks were - they literally made appmaker a fun thing to play with, and without them I have no doubt in my mind that Appmaker would have been received far less positively.

During the MozFest weekend the fact that if a tool can't let you have fun, people aren't going to want to use it, was so much more obvious than you get testing it with people in an office, or with people who've heard you talk about it before. If someone has never seen your tool before, and within minutes can have fun, that's a tool they want to come back to later.

### What didn't work

We're missing essential functionality of which we either didn't know it was essential, or didn't think was as essential as it turned out to be. So, a list of sorts:

1. We're missing components to do things that people care about: accessing online APIs, parsing that data, and plotting that data/routing it on to more user-engaging components. In fact, it turns out this is so essential that during the closing demos party, there was a version of appmaker being shown that had these things hacked in, in order to show off an app that showed weather and atmospheric data, plotted over time. That's really cool! And that should have been a thing that was already possible rather than requiring a fork with hacks.
2. We're missing the functionality for people to make their own component, and link that into their app. This is something that we actually used to have, but we had to disable quite a while ago due to complexities, and did not maintain while we rewrote Appmaker's core functionality. Especially given the missing components in the previous point, this one's plain annoying.
3. As a web technology, and this one's really interesting, we're missing an import function, where we say "my app actually lives over on http://someplace/app.html" and have Appmaker load that app into the designer for editing. Even a "paste in your code" function so that people who've been working in a local copy of Appmaker would have made a different given that internet can be spotty, and running a login-less, database-less local copy of appmaker is really easy.

Of course there were also the usual bugs that only come out during massive testing, such as the fact that a component we thought we'd removed still being listed, or a not-often-used component not behaving properly, which is always great to discover, if a little embarassing!

### What's next?

One of the major activities on Appmaker following MozFest is clean-up. In the runup to MozFest, as well as over the past few months overhauling parts of the codebase, we've had a fair bit of build-up of dead code, unclean code, and of course, hacks to make things work "well enough" rather than "properly". It's time to address those issues, while also spending some time on working on the issues that surfaced during MozFest, to add essential components, and crucially: make real apps and document the process as learning kits, because if there are no recipes to follow, exploring a complex tool is not fun; it's a chore. There's also some technical debt that we need to repay in the form of hacks we did on the technologies that underpin Appmaker, which should be rewritten as proper patches and submitted as patch requests to the relevant projects.

**tl;dr: add essential components, custom components, and tutorials, tutorials, tutorials.**

## The take-home message

People really liked Appmaker, and that's great! They also had expectations that we didn't or couldn't meet, and that's not great from a "result" perspective, but *is* great from a "learning what people want" perspective. Also, and really once again, it's been made clear that tools that can't let you have fun aren't worth spending time on, and Appmaker can certainly do with more fun. That doesn't necessarily mean Appmaker itself needs to be made more fun, but we need more components and, crucially, good tutorials, on how to have fun in Appmaker by making something that's not just a cut and dry purpose-built app, but something you can keep playing with after you made it.

If you were at MozFest 2014, or you have an interest in Appmaker and helping us improve it, you can find us in the #appmaker IRC channel on irc.mozilla.org (if you like real-time interacting) or on github over at [github.com/mozilla-appmaker/appmaker](https://github.com/mozilla-appmaker/appmaker) if you prefer the more ticket-based communication. With everyone slowly returning to work after post-MozFest vacations (a yearly tradition!) I'm looking forward to making Appmaker leaner, faster, and more what you want, based on what you've told us!