Sometimes someone finds a pothole in your reasonably smooth-surfaced open source software, and when you walk over to see what they're talking about, you actually find a rabbit hole instead. This happened over the weekend as someone filed a bug titled "[Noise has always the same seed ](https://github.com/processing-js/processing-js/issues/131)" for [Processing.js](processingjs.org).

On the surface, it sounded like a seed value simply didn't make it into the Perlin noise generator, but it did. And that's when things got interesting.

In order to generate [Perlin noise](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perlin_noise) (I know, [simplex noise](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simplex_noise) is much better, but [Processing](http://processing.org) uses Perlin noise, so Processing.js does, too) we use a [Marsaglia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiply-with-carry) sequence generator. This generator needs to be seeded with two values:

```
function Marsaglia(i1, i2) {
  // from http://www.math.uni-bielefeld.de/~sillke/ALGORITHMS/random/marsaglia-c
  var z=i1 || 362436069, w= i2 || 521288629;
  var intGenerator = function() {
    z=(36969*(z&65535)+(z>>>16)) & 0xFFFFFFFF;
    w=(18000*(w&65535)+(w>>>16)) & 0xFFFFFFFF;
    return (((z&0xFFFF)<<16) | (w&0xFFFF)) & 0xFFFFFFFF;
  };

  this.doubleGenerator = function() {
    var i = intGenerator() / 4294967296;
    return i < 0 ? 1 + i : i;
  };
  this.intGenerator = intGenerator;
}
```

And in the Perlin function, we check if we have a generator bound; if not, we build a new one either seeded or "clean" depending on whether a noiseSeed was set:

```
p.noiseSeed = function(seed) {
  noiseProfile.seed = seed;
  noiseProfile.generator = undef;
};
```

which works in conjunction with:

```
function PerlinNoise(seed) {
  var rnd = seed !== undef ? new Marsaglia(seed) : Marsaglia.createRandomized();
  ...
}
```

Nothing really strange going on here, except Marsaglia() takes two arguments, and we're passing one. Then again, looking at the Marsaglia code, that's fine: the second argument defaults to 521288629 if there is no input (or the input is falsey like the number 0 or an empty string). However, no matter what seed got set, the Perlin noise was always the same. 

Looking a bit deeper, the Perlin noise function creates a noise landscape that it uses to map "noise coordinates" to actual values. If two coordinates round to the same point in the map, you get the same noise value. That's handy, but in this case even if we reseeded the generator, to effect a new map, it was the same map. What was going on?

```
function PerlinNoise(seed) {
  var rnd = seed !== undef ? new Marsaglia(seed) : Marsaglia.createRandomized();
  var i, j;
  // generate permutation
  var perm = new Uint8Array(512);
  for(i=0;i<256;++i) { perm[i] = i; }
  for(i=0;i<256;++i) { var t = perm[j = rnd.intGenerator() & 0xFF]; perm[j] = perm[i]; perm[i] = t; }
  // copy to avoid taking mod in perm[0];
  for(i=0;i<256;++i) { perm[i + 256] = perm[i]; }
  ...
}
```
The `perm` array acts as the Perlin map, and is initialised as an identity array, so perm[0] is 0, perm[5] is 5, etc. Then the map gets permuted, so we start swapping pairs perm[i] and perm[(some random index between 0 and 255 inclusive)], so that we keep a balanced array but some or all elements are now out of order:
```
var t = perm[j = rnd.intGenerator() & 0xFF];
perm[j] = perm[i];
perm[i] = t;
```
And that's where *everything breaks down*... this code was written with the implicit assumption that taking a subset of bits from a random number is also random. In this particular case, we generate a random 32 bit integer, and then throw away the upper 24 bits so that we're left with a number between 0 and 255 (inclusive) to act as our array index for swapping pairs.

Now, to make this clear: **there is no such guarantee**, every pseudo-random number generator can generate sequences that are completely different, but share identical bits at some fixed position between two or more sequences. The only time you can get away with this is if you've made sure you know what kind of random numbers you're generating, and whether there is a guarantee of randomness in the bit patterns.

So what happens here?
```
function Marsaglia(i1, i2) {
  var z=...,  w = i2 || 521288629;
  var intGenerator = function() {
    z = something new involving only z
    w = something new involving only w
    return 32 bit number with high sixteen bits from z and low sixteen bits from w
  };
  ...
}
```
And suddenly the reason why seeding never worked becomes painfully obvious: we're generating pseudo-random numbers in which, if `i2` is zero or falsey, the lower 16 bits are *always the same bits*. They've been rearranged a little, sure, but they always get rearranged the same way, so they might as well not be: If we have the last 8 bits from these numbers to act as pair swapping index for our Perlin map, those values will *always be the same*

So that's fun.

Why didn't we find this before? Because we had no unit test for noise. We tested the `random()` and `randomGaussian()` functions, but there simply was no unit test for `noise()` and `noiseSeed()`. Simply taking the unit tests for randoms and [adapting it for noise](https://github.com/processing-js/processing-js/blob/master/test/unit/noise.pde) immediately revealed the problem, breaking the build, and forcing someone to fix it before the library would compile again. The fix we went with was to make sure the Marsaglia generator always gets two numbers instead of one:
```
function PerlinNoise(seed) {
  var rnd = seed !== undef ? new Marsaglia(seed, (seed<<16)+(seed>>16)) : Marsaglia.createRandomized();
  ...
}
``` 
This fixes the problem by taking the seed value, swapping the 16 high and low bits so that we get a second number, and then we seed the Marsaglia generator with both numbers. No more implicit `w`. Of course, the problem of casting a 32 bit integer to an 8 bit integer in the assumption this is safe still exists, but now at least we've guaranteed that it's "safe enough" for generating Perlin noise, where that guarantee had never even been investigated before.

The moral of the story: have unit tests. And if you don't, have users who are willing to let you know that things are super broken.