<a href="http://pomax.github.io/1419289380022" target="_blank">In a previous post</a> I explored [React](http://facebook.github.io/react) because we're looking at using it for new apps in the Mozilla foundation engineering team, and I covered what you're going to run into when you pick it up for the first time.

The **tl;dr:** version is that React doesn't use HTML, anywhere. It *only* offers a convenient syntax shorthand that looks like HTML, but obeys XML rules, and is literally the same as writing `React.createElement("tagname", {props object})`. For a web UI framework, that might seem weird, but it frees you to think about your UI as functional blocks, where you don't have "divs in divs" but "functional components composed of other functional components", and model your UI logic and interaction that way. The fact that it renders into the browser is nice, because that's what we want, but in no way actually important to your design process.

So: I like React. But React can't do everything, and there are things that make no sense to do as a React component, like plain JS functionality. For instance, if you want an image manipulation component, then by all means write it, but you're not going to also include all the code for the under-the-hood image processing library. You want to keep that separate.

# What's still missing?

That post didn't cover everything, and hopefully it left some questions on the table, so let's address those: what's still missing?

# If you need to manipulate the DOM content

There are some cases where manipulating the DOM content is necessary. It's **not** necessary if you're in control of your content. For instance, using jQuery UI to turn an element with an accordion class into an accordion is highly questionable, you should just model that accordion as a set of components and make them do what you need. It's kind of not a lot of work in the slightest. However, it's definitely necessary if you have some unformatted text data that needs to be converted into HTML, such as wiki text, markdown, etc.

We can use React's [`dangerouslySetInnerHTML`](http://facebook.github.io/react/docs/special-non-dom-attributes.html) to set this, and [`getDOMNode()`](http://facebook.github.io/react/docs/working-with-the-browser.html#refs-and-getdomnode) to extract the result, in small dedicated components.

For instance, this blog uses a React `<Entry>` components consist of some scaffolding and two meaningful sub-components: a MarkDown component, and an Editor component. The latter expresses a plain old `<textarea>` which updates its internal state whenever the user changes data. If the user clicks outside the editable area, `<Entry>` is informed of the changes made in the editor, hides the editor, reveals the MarkDown component, and then tells the MarkDown component to turn the new content into "whatever it needs to turn into", which the MarkDown component does by using the [marked](http://npmjs.org/package/marked) library.

```
var React = require("react");
var marked = require("../bower_components/marked/lib/marked");

module.exports = React.createClass({

  render: function() {
    var html = {__html: marked(this.props.text)};
    return <div ref="post"
                className="post"
                hidden={this.props.hidden}
                onClick={this.props.onClick}
                dangerouslySetInnerHTML={html}/>
  },

  getHTML: function() {
    return this.refs.post.getDOMNode().innerHTML
  }

});
```

In order to have our component render post-markdown-conversion HTML, we convert the passed in text, and then inject this (since this is technically unpredictable content, we have to use the `dangerouslySetInnerHTML`, to indicate we kind of know what we're doing here, but do so outside of React's control), and then in order to make sure we can also do things with that converted HTML later, we have a function that consults the actual DOM node into which our converted content was injected.

# If you need things to "kick in" when a component is created or destroyed: mixins

We can also make use of a neat construct called a "[mixin](http://facebook.github.io/react/docs/reusable-components.html#mixins)", which is an object that you can give to React components, and they get "mixed into" a component, so that it has `this`-level access to all the functions defined in the mixin.

Let's look an example: `onClickOutside`. React itself has no way to make components react to clicks that originate "outside" of them. It has an `onClick={...}` but no `onClickOutside={...}` concept. This can be inconvenient, or downright annoying: does that mean we have to write document.click handlers in every component we use? Thankfully: no. We can [implement this as a mixin](https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-onclickoutside), adding the document level click handler when a component is mounted, and making sure to do clean up when it the component gets unmounts:

```
var OnClickOutside = {
  componentDidMount: function() {
    if(!this.handleClickOutside)
      throw new Error("missing handleClickOutside(event) function in Component "+this.displayName);

    var fn = (function(localNode, eventHandler) {
      return function(evt) {
        var source = evt.target;
        var found = false;
        // make sure event is not from something "owned" by this component:
        while(source.parentNode) {
          found = (source === localNode);
          if(found) return;
          source = source.parentNode;
        }
        eventHandler(evt);
      }
    }(this.getDOMNode(), this.handleClickOutside));

    document.addEventListener("click", fn);
    associate(this, fn);
  },

  componentWillUnmount: function() {
    var fn = findAssociated(this);
    document.removeEventListener("click", fn);
  }
};
```

This mixin is used in the blog's `<Entry>` component, and allows for editing a post and then clicking anywhere outside of the editor, to effect a content saving and committing to github.

This mixing *looks* a little like a React component, in that it has functions that are named the same as the life cycle functions in a React component, and React will take any such function and make sure they gets called when a components associated life cycle function is called. Looking at the code for blog entries:

```
var Entry = React.createClass({
  mixins: [
    OnClickOutside
  ],
  componentDidMount: function() {
    // this code, *and the code from the mixin*, will run
    var state = this.props.metadata;
    state.postdata = this.props.postdata;
    this.setState(state);
  },
  ...
  handleClickOutside: function(evt) {
    // outside clicks simply tie into a function we already use:
    this.view();
  },
  ...
  view: function() {
    if(this.state.editing) {
      // go from edit mode to view mode:
      var self = this;
      self.setState({ editing: false }, function() {
        self.props.onSave(self);
      });
    }
  },
  ...
});
```
When `<Entry>`'s `componentDidMount` function is triggered, the code from the mixin *also* gets run. We don't need to write any code inside the component to make sure we trigger things at exactly the right time: we can simply exploit the life cycle of a component and rely on mixins to tie into their associated functions to do what we need.

## If you need it for one component, you probably need it more often

If you need to capture aspects that are shared by multiple components, you have two choices: mixins, or module requirements. For instance, if you need a universal `timestampToUUID()` function so that all your components will be using the same format, you can write a mixin for that, and be assured that all your components now speak the same timestamp language, or you can use a module requirement in your components (ES6, commonjs, etc. Whatever the rest of your app has as requirement support).

In traditional OOP this would be handled through inheritance, but React doesn't do inheritance: its OOP is based on compositing uncoupled objects into meaningful structures.

The choice between mixin or requirement is mostly based on "are things supposed to happen during life cycle points" paired with "is the functionality universal, or tied to component instances". For instance, `onClickOutside` matches both those criteria. A state recorder (for saving/loading entire app states) might be another, where components need to bind and unbind to it during mount/unmount.

However, a github connector can be set up once for the entire app, which means it makes for more sense to require it in as an independent module with anything React-specific to it.

# Building and bundling

So far everything's been talking about loose files. Mixings and components alike have been written in code that doesn't really do much other than "be loaded into global context" and most developers will agree that's kind of bad. You might do that in combination with an `index.dev.html` or something, but seriously: bundle that stuff.

So let's look at how to bundle React code.

The most successful formula that I know of is the "write it in commonjs format, and use browserify" one, where we rewrite our code so that it follows the commonjs export/require methodology, so that we can run the code through a bundler that knows how to resolve all those requirements. My commonjs environment of choice is [Node.js](http://nodejs.org), and my bundler of choice is [Browserify](http://browserify.org).

## Let's-Node-that-code

Let's do a quick rewrite. As demonstrator, I'll rewrite the MarkDown component that we saw earlier:

```
var React = require("react");
module.exports = React.createClass({
  mixins: [
    require("../mixins/markdown")
  ],
  render: function() {
    this.html = this.markdown(this.props.text)
    return <div className="post" hidden={this.props.hidden} onClick={this.props.onClick} {...this.html}/>
  },
  getHTML: function() {
    return this.html.dangerouslySetInnerHTML.__html;
  }
});
```

A pretty straight forward rewrite, but the important part there is the mixin `require` call. We no longer have the mixin live in global context, we need to load it from "somewhere". Node.js can load either from an installed package location, or from a relative file path, so in this case we load React as an installed package, the mixin from a local file, and we're done. Of course we need to make sure the mixins are of the right commonjs format, too:

```
var marked = require("../bower_components/marked/lib/marked");
module.exports = {
  markdown: function(string) {
    return {
      dangerouslySetInnerHTML: {
        __html : marked(string)
      }
    };
  }
};
```

And this is an equally simple rewrite. Instead of relying on `marked` living in global context, we explicitly require it in, and that's pretty much that.

# If it doesn't error out in Node, it'll load in the browser

[Browserify](http://browserify.org) can take Node.js code, walk through all the dependencies and requirements and then spit out a single, bundled file that shims the require mechanism for the browser, so that code that works in Node, also works in the browser. Normally this doesn't require anything special, in that you just point browserify at your main app.js file and it does the rest:

```
$> browserify main.js -o bundle.js
```

Done, that would grow your 10 line `main.js` file into a 400kb bundle of all your required in code plus all the required dependencies. Your users cache that bundle once, and from then on the browser simply reloads it from cache. One HTTP request, once, and you know that if your URL is reachable, then none of the dependencies your app has will cause your app to fail loading: it's all just there. And it'll be small over the wire, because gzip transmissions can compress javascript really well. The bigger the file, the better the compression can be because there's more data to mark as "the same" (there's an upper limit to that of course, but a 400kb single file will typically compress far better than a hundred 4kb files).

However, React comes with JSX syntax, so it's not quite as easy as just running Browserify and being done, but that's where Gulp comes in...

# Gulp - chain all parts of build for great success

[Gulp](http://gulpjs.com) is very nice. It lets you set up "[streams](https://github.com/substack/stream-handbook)" to pipe data through some filter, and the hand it off to the next "thing that looks at the pipe". For using Browserify, we want to do something like "take code, transform its JSX, *then* bundle it all up", and with Gulp, that's really simple! Here's the gulp build script for compiling the JS bundle that this blog relies on:

```
var gulp = require('gulp');
var concat = require('gulp-concat');

/**
 * Browserify bundling only.
 */
gulp.task('browserify', function() {
  var browserify = require('browserify');
  var transform = require('vinyl-transform');
  var reactify = require('reactify');
  var source = require('vinyl-source-stream');

  // Don't process react/octokit, because we can "bundle"
  // those in far more efficiently at the cost of a global
  // variable for React and Octokit. "oh no"
  var donottouch = require('browserify-global-shim').configure({
    'react': 'React',
    'octokit': 'Octokit'
  });

  return browserify('./components/App.jsx')
    .transform(reactify)
    .transform(donottouch)
    .bundle()
    .pipe(source('bundle.js'))
    .pipe(gulp.dest('./build/'));
});

/**
 * Pack in the React and Octokit libraries, because this
 * saves about 200kb on the final minified version compared
 * to running both through browserify the usual way.
 */
gulp.task('enrich', ['browserify'], function() {
  return gulp.src([
     './bower_components/react/react.min.js',
     './bower_components/octokit/octokit.js',
     './build/bundle.js'
   ])
   .pipe(concat('enriched.js'))
   .pipe(gulp.dest('./build/'));
});

/**
 * Minify everything, using uglify.
 */
gulp.task('minify', ['enrich'], function() {
  var uglify = require('gulp-uglify');
  return gulp.src('./build/enriched.js')
   .pipe(concat('gh-weblog.js'))
   .pipe(uglify())
   .pipe(gulp.dest('./dist/'));
});

/**
 * our "default" task runs everything, but -crucially- it
 * runs the subtasks in order. That means we'll wait for
 * files to be written before we move on to the next task,
 * because in this case we can't run parallel tasks.
 */
gulp.task('default', ['minify'], function() {
  console.log("Finishing packing up.");
});
```

This runs three tasks: one to browserify everything, one to enrich the resulting bundle with additional dependencies, and one to minify the whole thing. Those familiar with Gulp might ask "why is this three tasks instead of just one massive pipe" to which the answer is that Browserify with Vinyl and Uglify does really weird things. Some of those parts generate streams, some of them generate buffers, and some of them really, really don't want to work together without an additional three modules designed specifically to do things like "Forcing things to buffers" or "injecting files in the middle of a pipe". It gets weird. Also, and this is the proper reason rather than just "it's more of a hassle": Gulp tasks should be written such that each tasks only does one job. If you need to do multiple things, you write one task per thing, and chain them. And that's exactly what we're doing here.

## Wait, why do we run Browserify *and* bundle dependencies manually?

Fun fact: there are limitation to how you can bundle code with `require()` calls, due to how Browserify works. By resolving require() statements for all dependency that show up in the code, Browserify will bundle anything that is required, even if the associated code never actually hits the requirement at runtime. For instance: Octokit can run in the browser with a <60kb footprint, because the browser has virtually everything it needs. In Node.js it needs to shim a fair number of things so with all require()ments loaded its footprint is 320 kb. Browserify has no concept of "pruning after checking what gets loaded", so it just builds the full 320kb. Even React suffers from this: using the for-browsers version of React, as opposed to letting Browserify bundle it in, saves us about 25kb. It's not as much a difference as for Octokit, but still adds up for justifiable reason.

## Back to our gulp runner

So we run the three tasks: use Browserify for everything we can bundle without bloating (so, without React and Octokit), then a task that adds React and Octokit on top, and then a task that minifies everything using the [Uglify](https://www.npmjs.com/package/gulp-uglify) minifier. This recipe turns 17 files amounting to 250kb into a single file that's only 183kb. Fewer script includes AND less data. Very nice. Now we can load this up with a single script requirement on-page:

```
<script src='gh-weblog/dist/gh-weblog.js'></script>
```

And thus we get production levels of happiness. Adding server-side gzipping will make this package only 50kb over the wire, which is perfectly acceptable for "everything the app needs to run".

# The take-home message

Writing React code so that it can be efficiently bundled for production deployment is actually pretty simple, once you know which tools to use. The difference between a plain React component definition and a Node.js style definition is almost nothing (and there's even a Sublime Text plugin that'll just generate you a full Node.js style React component skeleton by typing "new R" and selecting "rcc"), but using the Node.js style code means we can run everything through Browserify and pipe filters, and end up with a highly optimised package, ready for delivery to the user.

## The corrollary: remember you're working with computers!

Technology's not perfect: sweet as Gulp and Browserify are, in this case we had to mess around with what Browserify gets to require into the bundle and what we want to keep out, because we care about deploy size. For any project, that's a thing to take into consideration. Maybe you don't even want to bundle certain things in at all. For instance, we could have left React out of the bundle entirely and loaded it from  CDN. I decided not to, because facebook's CDN for React is actually a redirect to an http URL, even when you're on HTTPS, so anyone loading the site over HTTPS will see the site header, and nothing else. So: remember you're working with computers!