About two weeks ago, I was fixing my favourite ramen bowl using traditional Japanese pottery repair techniques, which involves working with "urushi", a natural laquer obtained from the [Chinese Laquer Tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_laquer_tree). This might not mean anything to you, until I explain to you that there is a compound known to science called "urushiol" that is found in poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac, cashew trees, and other such nasty plants, and that is causes massive reactions in a large portion of humans.

Urushi is what that compound is named after, and while I wore gloves while working on my ramen bowl, I took them off before cleaning up. And so I ended up with [urushiol-induced contact dermatitis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Urushiol-induced_contact_dermatitis). The nasty thing about it is that it doesn't kick in immediately. As an antigen reaction, the first time this happens it takes one to two weeks before your body reacts to it, but like any good antigen reaction, the second time it only takes a few days. However, a "a few days" is not "immediately" and so you don't realise you screwed up until three days later, when it's too late: this is happening, better make your peace with it.

And making your peace with it is hard: the affected skin will start to rash and blister, and those blisters will just get bigger and bigger, spawning blisters INSIDE of them, and joining up to form huge finger-spanning blisters with smaller blisters inside of them. If that sounds horrible, good news: it's even worse because it also itches like *mad*.

There are some ways to mitigate it, and none of them are drugs or creams: the most effective way to deal with the itching is to soak the affected region (if possible) in super hot water. As hot as you can stand, and then just a fraction hotter. It desensitizes the tissue and alleviates the itching for at least a few hours. And after a week, the blisters start to recede again once the body finally figures out that none of its defenses are actually doing anything (no kidding, if only we could tell it that earlier), and then the rest of your body starts to catch up: any part of your body that undergoes repeated skin stress (bits that chafe up against clothing, a scrape you got from walking into a door handle, and so on) develops a rash, too. No blisters, but you'll enjoy swelling and rashing and massive itchiness a second time over.

Now, that sounds horrible, and it kind of is, but the most annoying part is that once you realise what's happening, it's a) too late and b) you're going to lose the functionality of whatever got the blister part of the deal. In my case, my left hand blistered up so badly that I couldn't use it, and my right was pretty close too. I ended up buying curator's gloves just so that moving my fingers ever so slightly wouldn't make blisters rub up against blisters, causing itching and pain.

Does that sound gross? Good: **wear gloves when working with urushi, and wear clothes if you're in a poison ivy/poison oak region**.

Seriously, it'll take you down, and if you live in North America, your doctor's just going to prescribe antibiotics and a topical cream, neither of which will actually do anything to make you heal faster - they're just overreactions to "you might scratch yourself open and get an infection O_O" (protip: don't scratch. Yeah it itches like crazy, suck it up. 2 weeks from now you won't remember itching 2 weeks ago). You have to ride it out, and you have to not scratch, and you will be driven close to mad, while not being able to do your job.

Don't be like me.