Probably the best tutorial on getting started writing a VST plugins (whether you want to make an instrument or a filter) is Martin Finke's [Making Audio Plugins](http://www.martin-finke.de/blog/tags/making_audio_plugins.html). It covers going from "zero to hero" but it has one downside: it's from 2012, and the tools used have some issues in 2017. Not big issues, just "big enough to frustrate people who would otherwise dive right in, into doing something else instead". So, what can we do?

First off, it's 2017 (coming up to 2018) and I'm going to assume you're using Windows mostly because that's what I do (because several audio production tools I use only exist for Windows. I also have a mac, yes I own Ableton, no I'm not covering using XCode in 2017 here. But if you want to do that work for me, I will be more than happy to add your findings to this blog post! (hit me up [here](https://github.com/pomax/pomax.github.io/issues) to discuss that!).

## Getting the right tools

It's 2017, you're probably on Windows 10, so let's go:

1. Grab [Visual Studio 2017 Community Edition](https://www.visualstudio.com/downloads/).
2. When you install that, make sure to check all the SDKs and install those. Pretty important

## Following the instructions

While "Making Audio Plugins [part 2](http://www.martin-finke.de/blog/articles/audio-plugins-002-setting-up-wdl-ol/)" covers most of it, once you've used python to create your first plugin code, and you're loading the `.sln` in Visual C++, you're going to hit warnings and errors.

_Don't worry, it's okay_

Accept the suggestion by VC++ to upgrade the project to the modern SDKs (which it will fail at, but again, that's okay), and then instead of trying to compile `MyFirstPlugin-app`, first make sure the project and Visual C++ know that we're working on Windows 10.

### Update the platform

Go to `Project` and then `Properties`, and in the "General" tab, change the platform tools from Windows XP (yep. Windows XP) to Windows 10. 

If you don't do this, you'll see errors about SDK_71A things not being set in the registry. They are complete red herrings, because what they really mean is "the project is using an SDK that I don't know about", which is true: we're on Windows 10, we're using SDK version 141, not version 71!

### Update your include path

Still in `Project`/`Properties`, in the "VC++ Directories" section, add two directories to the "Includes" path. Specifically, you want to add the `mu` and `shared` dirs for the Windows 10 SDK that you're working with. As of today, for the Fall creator edition, that would be `C:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Kits\10\Include\10.0.16299.0` so you need to add the following to that path:

- `C:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Kits\10\Include\10.0.16299.0\mu;`
- `C:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Kits\10\Include\10.0.16299.0\shared;`

If you don't do this, or use the wrong path, you'll probably see a lot of errors about a missing `windows.h` (which is in the `mu` directory) and/or a missing `winapifamily.h` (which is in the `shared` directory).

### Retargeting the project

Finally, after accepting these changes to the project properties, we right-click on `MyFirstPlugin-app` and choose "retarget projects". This will pop up a dialog that lets you pick the SDK version, and make sure to pick the `10.0.....` version that matches what we used for the Platform Tools in the project properties.

## You're good to go!

Alright, now we can get back to that awesome tutorial and make some audio plugins. Select `MyFirstPlugin-app`, hit F5 to start a compile, and "things should just work(tm)".