I like to cook, and I like to record the process, although I haven't been doing this nearly enough as I should. We moved, I got some new camera gear, before you know it, it's a year later. It happens.

But, our new place has a fairly decent kitchen, and I'd like to record my prep and stove work, and so I wanted a setup where I could just stream when I was doing random cooking, while also recording when doing interesting dishes, and that poses a problem because the "prep stations" (two kitchen islands, one wood surfaced, one stainless/markble) are a good 3 meters away from the stove and range, and rolling a tripod with led panels and an HD recorder on it is fairly cumbersome. Especially since the prep stations need the lighting, whereas the stove/range already have plenty of decent light.

So I figured I'd get a nice long HDMI cable, and only move the camera around. 

But this poses a problem.

### What kind of HDMI cable do we need?

[HDMI](https://www.hdmi.org/) is not one thing, there's a few standards, notably HDMI 1.4, HDMI 2.0, HDMI 2.0a, HDMI 2.0b, and HDMI 2.1, and their main differentiator is "bandwidth". That is: the amount of data per second you can push from one device to another device. "1080p", "3d", "dts audio", "ethernet", these are all fancy functions that only work if there's sufficient bandwidth.

In fact, looking at a [comprehensive table of HDMI version](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HDMI#Main_specifications), there's some interesting things going on: HDMI 1.* never makes it over 10 gigabits per second, whereas HDMI 2.0 can do 14 gbps, and HDMI 2.1 can do 42 gbps.

But wait, there's more! Cables aren't perfect, and the longer the cable, the more signal degradation you get, to the point where individual frames (or even long sequences of frames) can get corrupted beyond the decoder's ability to fix, at which point you get black frames. Which is the opposite of what you want.

So, what are some usable cable lengths? Well, that depends: what is the cable made of, and what method was it assembled in?

Different cables use different materials and construction methods, and [signal reflection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Signal_reflection) becomes a problem sooner or later depending on the quality of material and methods used.

The highest quality copper "high speed" HDMI cables, capable of 18/14gbps, can theoretically reach 10 meters but in practice they almost never do. Of course, if you don't _need_ the maximum bandwidth, you can easily get a high quality 30 meter cable and be fine: 1080p from some video source to an HDMI projector, for instance, is absolutely no problem if you're using an HDMI 2.0 high speed cable. If you need a 4k signal, though, things get trickier.

### Let's jump into Chroma subsampling!

Not only is 4k video four times as much data as 1080p video, but the higher resolution typically also comes with higher bit depth and more complex ["chroma subsampling"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chroma_subsampling).

If you're used to RGB pixels, where each pixel encodes its colour _and_ brightness at the same time, then chroma subsampling will probably be a new idea to you: instead of "full data", pixels are encoded in blocks of (typically) 2 rows of 4 pixels each, and while each pixel has its own brightness encoded, colour information gets applied to multiple pixels at a time, so you could have a set of eight pixels:

```
p1 p2   p3 p4
p5 p6   p7 p8
```

with unique brightness information per pixel:

```
b1 b2   b3 b4
b5 b6   b7 b8
```

but with colour information applied to blocks of multiple pixels:

```
 c1  (c1)   c2  (c2)
(c1) (c1)  (c2) (c2)
```

So in the above example: eight pixels, but the left four are "different shades of `c1`" and the right four are "different shades of `c2`". This reduces the bandwidth needed to transmit the data, at the expense of losing some of the information compared to true raw video footage.

There are [a few standard schemes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chroma_subsampling#Sampling_systems_and_ratios) for chroma subsampling, with `4:4:4` being "raw video": **4** columns of 2, where the first row has **4** unique values, and the second row has an _additional_ **4** unique values, and every other `4:x:y` value being subsampled.

And of course, the more unique values that are supported by the subsampling scheme, the more data we have that needs to be transmitted, and the more bandwidth a cable needs to have to support the signal. And the faster signal reflection will become a problem.

### How many bits are you using?

Of course, chroma subsampling only gives you part of the information needed to figure out your bandwidth needs: we also need to know how many bits are used for the brightness and colour values. Much like digital photography, digital videography has a few options.

The classic value for simple video is 8 bits. A simple `[0,255]` range that works well for traditional computer graphics because regular monitors are (even today) typically 8 bit per colour channel. However, video doesn't get shot purely for typical computer monitors, and -as with digital photography- the fewer the bits, the less dynamic range, and dynamic range makes just as big a difference for video as it does for photography. So most video cameras can do 10 bits, and expensive video cameras can do 12, 14, or even 16 bits.

### Oh yeah, which frame rate are you shooting at?

Finally, the last thing that matters is how many frames of video data you're generating per second. Obviously, a 60 fps data stream is going need twice as much bandwidth as a 30 fps data stream. You might even shoot at 60 fps despite your final video using 24 fps, purely so you have more data available to work with during editing.

### Back to HDMI cables!

And now we have everything we need to know to understand the limits of HDMI cables. The HDMI 2.0 standard defines a maximum bandwidth of 18.2 gigabits per second, so let's do some maths. A raw 4k frame constitutes 8.3 megapixels, which at 10 bit `4:4:4` ("true", "raw", or "not subsampled"), would require 30 * 8.3 = 250 megabits per frame, which at 60 frames per second means we need 15 gigabits per second of bandwidth.

And if we look back at the maximum data rate for HDMI 2.0, we don't get 15Gbps. We only get 14.4... so that could be a problem. In fact, video also usually has sound in addition to picture, so we now have negative bandwidth left to also add in audio. That really is a problem!

Of course, most devices don't send out raw data, they apply at least _some_ kind of compression, and the same is true for HDMI video: rather than sending all the raw data, an HDMI video stream is typically encoded as [`.mov`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QuickTime_File_Format) or [`.mp4`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MPEG-4_Part_14), with data compressed either as ["long GOP"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Group_of_pictures), blocks of frames (storing 1 real frame, and then a collection of "differences from one frame to the next", super handy for fixed camera shots with a fair amount of scene content that hardly changes over time), or as ["all-intra"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intra-frame_coding), consisting of individual frames (useful when the camera moves and every single pixel will have a different value from frame to frame). So what we end up with is *quite a lot of parameters* that all work together to determine whether or not your HDMI signal is going to make it from one end of the cable to the other end of the cable in one piece.

### Back to the kitchen!

So what *are* my parameters? First off, my camera is a [Panasonic Lumix GH5](https://www.panasonic.com/uk/consumer/cameras-camcorders/lumix-g-compact-system-cameras/dc-gh5l.specs.html), capable of sending out 10 bit 4k video, with `4:2:2` subsampling, at 60 fps, *as long as it doesn't also have to record that*, which means it can either *send* 10 bit `4:2:2`, or *record* 10 bit `4:2:0`. It does not have the processing power to both read out a 10 bit `4:2:2` video signal _and_ internally encode that to an SD card at the same time.

(Could they have put a better cpu in the camera to make it able to do that anyway? Yep. Would it burn out because the camera would overheat in minutes? Absolutely. Consumer cameras aren't exactly designed for with good cpu cooling in mind. Fun fact: commercial digital video cameras super duper are)

But that's okay, because SD cards are tiny, and 4k video file are huge, so instead of relying on the camera to save the video stream it's generating, I have an [Atomos Ninja Inferno](https://www.atomos.com/ninja-inferno), which is an external HDMI recorder capable of ingesting 4k, 10 bit `4:4:4` video at 60fps, and write that to an SSD.

Of course, the SSD needs to be _fast_ because while video isn't saved to file at 18gbps, it still needs a bloody fast drive to keep up with a high quality codec like ProRes, which uses about 1gbps for 10 bit `4:2:2` "medium quality" video. And the SSD needs to be _capacious_ because at that data rate, a minute of footage takes up 8.8 gigabytes of space. 

That's right, a 1TB SSD will hold about two hours of ProRes-medium video, roughly the length of a single film these days. You thought we finally lived in an era where you could fit hundreds of films on a single 1 terabyte harddisk? Not when you're _recording_ those films!

So, I have a camera spitting out 10 bit `4:2:2` 60 fps 4k video, and a recorder capable of ingesting 10 bit `4:2:2` 60 fps 4k. How long a cable can I put between those two?

### Copper cables

While HDMI 2.0-rated copper cables will happily do a 1080p signal over 30 feet or more, pushing the limit of what the cable can carry in terms of bandwidth severely limits how long a cable can get. Even a high quality cable will only do about 80 inches, 2 meters, of reliable signal. After that, frames start to drop, with intermittent signal deterioration past the point of being decodable, and while you might not notice that if your "recorder" is a TV, if it's a real recorder, those dropped frames are both unwanted, and very obvious. Imagine in your TV turned itself off every time a single frame dropped, and you can imagine the effect you get when frames drop for recording equipment.

You can, however, improve this cable length by using a "powered HDMI cable", which is similar to a powered USB cable in that it takes the incoming signal, boosts it to something so strong that it can survive unattenuated for a longer distance, and then sends that signal instead. These cables have their own power supply (yep: cables with power supplies) and can certainly bridge lengths of 10 meters, but they're really bulky, and as such really only good for equipment that isn't going to be moved around much. Plus you'll need to have a power cable that is long enough, too.

So: not super great for single-cameras setups.

There are some alternatives, of course: there are [HDMI-to-ethernet](https://www.newegg.com/Product/Product.aspx?Item=9SIA6ZP8E36502) and [HDMI-to-SDI](https://www.blackmagicdesign.com/products/miniconverters) converters, where you run a (very) short high quality HDMI cable from your source to the converter, which then sends the signal on either over one or more [ethernet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category_6_cable) cables, or over [SDI cable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serial_digital_interface), going into a converter back to HDMI at whatever destination you need to signal to get to. But those adapters also require power, and they're bulky, and so again, that's not going to work if you have a single camera that you need to move around.

What does that leave?

### Fiber optic cables

If you were entertaining the idea of dropping $200 on ethernet converters anyway, you now also have the option to instead buy a $200 HDMI cable. Which sounds like an insane amount of money, but we're not talking about regular cables, we're talking about glass.

Fiber optic HDMI cables have very-low-power converters in their plugs that convert electricity to optical signals, and then send light from one end of the cable to the other end, over distances that copper could never do, all the way up to 100 meters without needing external power.

That's amazing! 

Obviously I bought one!

...except fiber optic cables have a different problem: they're made of glass, and so they're fragile. Not "blow at them wrong and they break" fragile, but "transport them in a bouncy truck without enough padding and they will definitely stop working" fragile. And guess what happens when you order cables online? Which you'll have to do, because no local shop is going to carry $200 cables?

### Adventures in HDMI cable ordering!

So yeah, I ordered one online, and by the time it got to my house it was thoroughly busted. If you like the flickering of a poorly wired lamp, imagine that, but then for video feeds. So I had to send it back and get a replacement.

Which was also busted, flickering only marginally less.

So I actually talked to the folks at Atomos who admitted that they, too, have to order a high number of them in the hopes of getting at least one that happened to work, so... that's what I did: I ended up ordering four cables, of which two were busted and two worked, so I kept one and sent the other three back.

You might wonder how the people who make these cables even make any money, but remember that we're basically pushing the limit of what an HDMI cable can carry: all the cables that were busted for 10 bit `4:2:2` 4k video at 60 fps worked _perfectly fine_ for 10 bit `4:2:2` 4k video at 30 fps, as well as 8 bit `4:4:4` 4k video at 60 fps, so people who order these cables may literally never discover their cable's damaged. Only folks who really need them for the upper limit of what HDMI 2 cables can carry will notice.

*Hurray, that's me.*

### In conclusion

HDMI is weird. On the one hand it's super useful and the spec is ever improving, but on the other cable manufacturers are not interested in making cables that actually support HDMI at max settings, and so if you need anything beyond a regular length cable, you're going to be in for a ride. 

HDMI 2.1 is out, it has more than twice the bandwidth of HDMI 2.0, at 48 gbps, but no one's making HDMI 2.1 cables yet. There's a Chinese company that claims to make them, but they're so incredibly fat (even though they're fiber optic) that you can't connect one to a camera without the weight of the cable off the ground either snapping the connector on a side connection, or just falling out from a bottom connection. 

So, if you need a long cable: order many of them. Ordering a single cable at a time is guaranteed to give you a broken cable (for your needs) and you'll just end up in an endless cycle of filing for refunds or replacements. Save up, order four (or more) in one go and then keep one that works and send the rest back either as defective, or as over-stocked. Maybe one day cable manufacturers will change their packaging and fiber optic cables will be safe to ship individually, but that day is not today, and I don't expect it to come any time soon.

### So wait, which did you get?

I got this one: the [Monoprice SlimRun AV HDR High Speed Cable for HDMI-Enabled Devices, 18Gbps, Fiber Optic, AOC, YUV `4:4:4`, 50ft, Black](https://www.amazon.ca/gp/product/B06XS8T2W4) and when it works, it's lovely. It's light, its stable, I can carry the camera all around the kitchen or mount it on the prep station tripod or the range camera boom in seconds. 

But again, if you're thinking of getting a cable like this:

**order many more than you need, and send the ones you can't use back.**

And then when you have a working cable: have fun!