# LOAD DATA INFILE vs. INSERT

I used to curse at <a href="www.mysql.com" target="_blank">MySQL</a> for the problems that the <a href="http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.0/en/batch-commands.html" target="_blank">SOURCE</a> command has. It's slow, it doesn't treat files as files, but as single lines, each being line 0, and most annoyingly, it's slow.

Also, it takes really long to insert data.

So I was so happy to find the <a href="http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.0/en/load-data.html" target="_blank">LOAD DATA INFILE</a> "command", that I decided to do this quick post to explain why it's so delicious:

A million rows of data inserted in a few seconds = very tasty.

The basic idea is that you format your data as tab delimited non-quoted data, each field corresponding to a column in your table layout, and store this in a file. Say, "data.txt" - you then load it into mysql:
<blockquote>
mysql> LOAD DATA INFILE 'data.txt' INTO TABLE 'mydatabase.mytable';
</blockquote>
and job's a good'un. You have to make sure that every row of course has the all its colums filled out. Relying on "AUTO_INCREMENT" for a column to fill in missing values won't do, because the data no longer has any indicator of which field is for which column. However, unlike with SOURCE, an input to LOAD DATA file is treated as a genuine multi-line file with, so if you make a mistake, MySQL will actually tell you at which line your mistake was made. 

It's also a <a href="http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.0/en/ansi-diff-transactions.html" target="_blank">transaction</a> command, so if it finds an error, it will stop and undo anything it might have done up to that point. Rather than a chore, it's simply a matter of fixing the error in the text file, and rerunning the command - no need to delete partially inserted tables or something
Lovely.