my <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synesthesia">synesthesia</a>'s been coming up more than usual lately, so I should probably explain something about how it works, for me. First off, what synesthesia is: your brain bleeding senses into one another. If you hear color, or you smell textures, or you feel (by running your fingers over something) emotions, that's synesthesia. If you just read that and went "that makes no sense", you probably don't have this brain feature, but a surprisingly high number of people do, so let me explain mine.

a tonne of my senses just bleed over into the "colour experience" part of the brain, so if I hear something, it has an associated colour. And not "one colour". My wife's name is white with pink/purple fringing, the music I'm listening to at the moment is an almost rolling burgundy with orange and yellow bands. Also, and this is the crux, I don't see these colours. I just know them. In the same way that someone could go "midnight sky" and you think of what that means for you, non-colour-based experience tends to just have a splash of colour associated with it. I don't see it, I just know it on the spot as I go along.

If you asked me what colour "friday" had 20 years ago, it'd have been red. It's still red. The numbers three and four are two different shades of green, and have been so since forever. The drone of our Vancouver office's HVAC is a dark gray, and extremely irritating because it's not just an annoying sound, it's also a very boring colour to constantly have in the back of your mind.

Sounds also have shapes. But not the kind you know from geometry. A viola de gamba is a warm brownish red (typically) and maps to an infinitely long cylindrical shape with an undefined, but bouned, surface region, which expands as the notes are played. Each note generates one of these. That sounds very much like a vibrating string doesn't it? Violines are actually more like fish wire cutting through space. Which is really nothing like vibrating strings.

Now, there are varying degrees to which someone can have synesthesia. There's what I'd like to imagine is "most of the world" , where the notion of letters having colours, or sounds having shapes is just a thing and let's leave it at that (for now). Then there's debilitating forms, where all your senses are hardwired pretty badly, and you literally "see" shapes and colours, so that if you're having a donut while you're driving, the colour gets in the way of your regular vision. You could crash and die.

I don't have that. I can just say that X <sense verb> like Y, except unlike people without synesthesia, I can say the same thing next week without trying desperately to remember what I told you last week. This is just how "sensing" works for me.

fun fact: most people with synesthesia have no idea this is unusual, because there's nothing weird about the condition. It's like learning that the neighbours are black, or your new classmate has a groove in every finger nail. Yeah it's genetics but so what? Welcome to the real world, now you know a little bit more about how the planet you live on has dished out life.

The diversity is pretty f'cking awesome =)
