I used to actively run [nihongoresources](http://www.nihongoresources.com)  and developed a custom CMS for it back in the PHP "we're finally on 5!" days. I haven't done any maintenance on it for years now, but the host it's running on is upgrading its PHP installation to a more modern version and that means some of the calls the CMS uses are now obsolete. So let's revisit a CMS I forgot about.

First off, I figured I'd copy the slice of fs that houses the site back to my local machine because it's easier to work with when you have an exact copy. Except I forget that my past self had implemented a caching system for database queries so that individual query results were cached in .sqlite files for faster retrieval. Up side: that works really well. The host's mysql interfacing is slow, and reading from file is immediate. You get a result back in less than a second.  Winner!

Past-self also forgot to write a cron job for deleting outdated queries, so the site's been writing files to disk for about four years without a cleanup. I'm not joking when I say there were so many cache files, `find . | xargs rm` took so long the process monitor killed the process for taking up too much cpu time.

So that's the kind of CMS it is. If I had to redo it today, I'd probably use a node.js express+nunjucks setup instead, with as little "my own code" as only as much glue as necessary to tie together all the bits that make up the core of the app. That's, however, not happening today, so now that I've deleted all these cache files, it's mirror time.

But wait, I also need to update my local [Apache](http://projects.apache.org/projects/http_server.html) and [PHP](http://php.net) versions. Wait, what happened to the Windows .msi installers? The download section for PHP now points to a windows-specific subdomain, with downloads that are either source, or .zip files. That's... that's actually a step back in terms of functionality. And what's this? I shouldn't use real apache, but a custom [Apache Lounge](http://www.apachelounge.com) version that was built with VC++ 11? Which doesn't come with an .msi either? Again, just zip files?

What is going on, do these "for windows" people not actually <em>use</em> windows? Because it seems they don't. In fact, let's check out this gem in the apache lounge README:

<em>"- Unzip the Apache24 folder to c:/Apache24 (that is the ServerRoot in the config).   Default folder for your your webpages is DocumentRoot "c:/Apache24/htdocs"</em>

Really? Because that's not where programs go in Windows. They go in the "Program Files" folder, or "Program Files (x86)" on a 64 bit machine that you're installing a 32 bit application into. So let's put it in "Program Files/Apache Lounge/2.4" instead and let's see what happens. Because this better be able to deal with spaces in dir names.

<em>"Start apache in a DOS box:"</em>

In a what? This isn't windows 95, the command prompt is not DOS. I'd understand if you're catering to people who have no idea what's going on, but you're making me install a server daemon from .zip file on Windows. If you're making me do that, at least get your instructions right. No mention that you might want to open that command shell with administrative rights if you want to install this Apache as a service. Because who uses UAC? Aside from everyone on windows 7 or 8, and everyone unfortunate enough to still be in Vista but at least was smart enough to realise that "admin rights allwhere everywhen" is an extremely bad idea.

After getting things set up at least, it turns out the ProcessMonitor.exe has still not been made able to tell you why an instance won't start. Want to know why your server's not starting? Back to the command prompt with you! Oh, and you want it to start with windows? Well now, you'll have to add it to your start up folder. It's seriously as if this was compiled for windows 95 or 98, rather than a version of Windows that isn't 15 to 20 years old.


