I am not a fan of most blogging software, because it requires too much work. If it's not "hit 'new post' button, done", it's frankly too much work for me. And as it turns out, I [now have exactly what I want](http://github.com/Pomax/gh-blog), using the magic of GitHub's "user.github.io" concept, the octokit library (https://github.com/philschatz/octokit.js) for interfacing with github from the browser, and the "marked" markdown parser (https://github.com/chjj/marked) so that I can write in plain text and know it'll get styled all pretty-like.

Let me explain what I mean. Logging into the admin panel for this site is... well it doesn't exist. Instead there's a display:none button that lets me type my github token for this domain (and only for this domain, only granted access to modify the pomax.github.io repository), which gets stored in localStorage. That's my login.

If a token is found in localStorage, the UI adds a "new entry" button, and a "delete entry" button on each post, and turns on edit functionality: I click an entry, it comes editable text. Not through "contenteditable", but something a little more clever. I edit my post, using markdown syntax (which is really just 'syntax only when you really need it') and then I click somewhere outside the post. Done, it's just been updated, and synced to GitHub, as a standard commit.

In fact, the entire blog is just a github repository: http://github.com/Pomax/pomax.github.io has a single branch, "master", and its content is literally this blog. If I write entries, they end up in the /content directory. If I delete them, they get deleted. What more do you need?

It also means that all the content can be cloned, fetched, modified, pushed back up, whatever it is people do with git and GitHub.  So... I guess it's time to start writing blog posts.