There's a mathematical sequence that's been bothering me lately, and it's known as [Grandi's series](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grandi's_series), or simply as "s".

`\\[s = 1-1 + 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + ... \\]`

or, as a sum,

`\\[ s = \\sum_{n=0}^{\\infty}{-i^n} \\]`

The bit that's bothering is that as an infinite sequence, "s" should not have a well-defined value. The sum of the first term is 1, the first 2 terms is 0, the first three terms is 1 again, then 0, and so on. But infinities are weird, and so the argument goes that we can do the following:

1. `\\[s = 1-1 + 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + ... \\]`
2. `\\[1 - s = 1 - (1-1 + 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + ... ) \\]`
`\\[ ... = 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + ... \\]`
`\\[ ... = s\\]`

From which it follows that if 1-s is s, then 1 = 2s, and thus the sum of this infinite series is actually the number 1/2. Mathemagical! Except for the part where that ...=s step is made, because it's not actually correct. Infinities are weird, and here's a neat little fact that should make you raise an eyebrow:

`\\[1 - s = 1 - (a\\ sequence\\ of\\ length\\ S) =  (a\\ sequence\\ of\\ length\\ S) \\]`

Now, both "s" and "1-s" are infinite series, so that "length S" is "infinite" in both cases, but the "sum" 1-s is one term larger than the "sum" s:

`\\[ 1 - \\sum_{n=0}^{\\infty}{-i^n} + \\sum_{n=0}^{\\infty}{-i^n} = 1 \\]`

So even though "length S" is not a number but an abstract concept, we can still see something is going on here that's not just explained by saying "infinity = infinity". Infinities are not that simple...

Infinities might be infinite, but they're still well defined: even same-order infinities can have finite differences, so while the above "s = 1/2" is clever, it's also not exactly true. And it's not true in a very devious way.

We could say that a finite difference between two infinite sets is irrelevant in light of the infinities, but then we're also giving up the ability to use these infinities in mathematical formulae. If we can arbitrarily equal non-equal functions, we've lost maths altogether. If we go down that road, then we can't prove s is 1/2.

Or, we can say that the rules of mathematics still need to apply and then we can demonstrate that the two infinite series differ by one element and we can't actually deduce s is 1/2 because we end up with the unsolvable 1 - s = s'...

Either way, I find myself unable to accept s is one half. And that's the most remarkable part of this excursion.