This is a story of science, common sense, and humans still screwing up. Plot twist: that human was me.  It's also about articles like "The 10 most toxic items at dollar stores" as found over on, for instance, https://www.yahoo.com/health/the-10-most-toxic-items-at-dollar-stores-116677429238.html

Before we begin: this is not a post on how people are dumb for claiming safe materials are dangerous and oh my god how can you trust anything. This is about how people's conclusions can be *right*, even if their own arguments are complete nonsense. I'm going to give some different arguments, and they'll lead to the same conclusion: many plastics are pretty dangerous for humans to be around. But only because people (well, clearly not us, of course, you and I are smart people, right?) use them in ways that makes them dangerous. Which we do. A lot.

# Point the first: arguments of logic have nothing to do with chemistry.

If you combine a bunch of red and green M&Ms in a bowl, you have a bunch of red and green M&Ms, and the content of the bowl still behaves as red and green M&Ms. If you combine two chemicals to form another chemical, you're instead almost guaranteed that *virtually nothing* about the original ingredients still applies to the result. Chlorine is extremely toxic, Sodium explodes when it comes into contact with water. Combine the two and you get table salt, which is safe even in ridiculously high incidental doses, even when dissolved into water, where it dissolves into individual sodium and chlorine ions. That's right, sodium explodes in water. Sodium ions in water do pretty much nothing at all (other than help make the water conductive).

Most of the entries in this "13 things that something something" article (and many other like it) are based on the fairly ridiculous "X is dangerous, Y uses X as a compound, therefore Y is dangerous", which is a kind of logic that works in arguments about compositional linguistics, but makes absolutely no sense to try to even pretend bears any relevance to chemistry and chemical composition.

# Plot twist: that doens't mean Y *isn't* dangerous

However, while most of the entries are of the "X is made with Y, and X is bad, so Y is bad!" inclination, they do contain an element of truth and if you're the kind of person who reads these and then tweets `omg lol so much fail #sheeple #wtf`, then maybe you need to come back to the class, too. Your dismissal is too fast. These articles may be click bait by playing into people's fear of what they don't know anything about, but in a Shyamalanian twist they're not exactly wrong either. Just not for the reasons you'd think.

So let's start with this statement:

### **Just because a substance contains a component that, unbound, is dangerous, doesn't make the subtance dangerous.**

If these substances were to break down, that could be bad. So the real question is: what are the conditions under which these substances break down, and are you likely to run into those conditions? Hold on to your seat, it's science time.

## PVC

Take [PVC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polyvinyl_chloride), for instance. PVC is extremely stable and imminently safe, exactly because of the P: the normally dangerous [vinyl chloride](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vinyl_chloride) has been polymerized into inert chains that plain can't react the way individual VC molecules can. If they could spontaneously unbind, it'd be rather toxic and a carcinogenic, but you pretty much need to vapourise the PVC for that to happen. Yes, electrical cords can be made of PVC, and those can get hot and start vapourising  the PVC, but the **reason** they can get hot is because of bad wiring: either the wire inside the plastic is too thin to carry the charge being pumped through it, basically melting it inside the plastic, or the casing is shoddy and your live and neutral wires get to close or even touch, resulting in molten plastic and possibly a short circuit. In all these cases, you should not have been sold that cable, because it was faulty. Oh, also you might now have a house fire. The problem here isn't actually the PVC in the slightest, that's just a drop in a bucket of "this has already gone catastrophically wrong" when we reach the point where vinyl chlorides are being released.

## BFRs

Number 2 on the list in the aforementioned article is pretty interesting, but again for reasons you wouldn't think of, until you actually *do* some thinking: [BFRs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brominated_flame_retardant) on their own are safe, even if "[bromine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bromine)" itself is rather toxic. But, put it in kitchen utensils like spatulas and it's not so hard to imagine that people will buy that spatula and then use it to shuffle food around in a hot pan (despite hopefully having been taught to use a wooden spatula instead). So now we have an environment where there is a contact surface on which those BFR can break down, and we have potential toxin release happening in a place that is in pretty much constant contact with your food. This is not *necessarily* a problem: BFRs don't just break down into elemental bromine, but the breakdown products aren't exactly healthy, either. Then again: wait, we're doing *what*?? All kidding aside, why on earth would you use something made of a material that will break down when it melts,  **under conditions that melt it**?

## DEHPs

Then we have [DEHPs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bis%282-ethylhexyl%29_phthalate) (the chemical that makes plastics bendy, like the bendy straws from the article), which are interesting because as long as the plastic they're in remains cool, it stays in the plastic and the product is pretty much 100% safe. Even the quantities you might ingest from, say, a warmed up straw are typically just fine (a normal human body is perfectly capable of dealing with some DEHP. Do you live in an industrialised country? Congratulations, you're in almost constant contact with DEHPs). But, you can take the exposure too far: if you drink a lot of hot drinks, and you like to drink them through straws (you were a kid once, tea with a bendy straw is *teh amazeballs*, you'd do it every day if you could), and you do that all day every day for a while, then yes: after a few weeks you're pretty much guaranteed to suffer an acute reaction because you've accumulated more than your body can comfortably deal with, and it will let you know that in no uncertain terms.

# The bottom line: give things some thought.

For all of these "dangerous things" that the Dollar Stores sell,  it's not actually the materials they're made of that are inherently dangerous, it's whether you use them under conditions that make their materials break down. And this is (still!) something people tend to forget, because that's simply not something you need to consider for traditional materials like woods, metals, or ceramics. You are never in a million years going to run into the conditions necessary to make those toxic. Sure, you could burn your wooden spatula and inhale the fumes, and yes, you could cut yourself with a rusty knife, but these are freak accidents that take some serious and obvious oversight on your part.

Not so for plastics. The problem comes from using plastic items incorrectly, inappropriately, or downright stupidly, and so rather than complaining that it's irresponsible or dangerous for Dollar Stores to sell these things, which so many articles try to suggest so that you will virally spread the word, the real problem is *you*, the person buying these things: *you* need to ask yourself whether you're being sensible when you're holding that product in your hands and are considering walking over to the checkout counter with it to take home.

Are you tempted to buy that cheap plastic spatula? It's cheap, so that's a good deal. And if you're going to use it to flip cold pancakes, go for it, 100% safe. But Let's be realistic: you're going to use it to stir and flip things in a hot pan, and you're going to slowly melt your spatula over time. Really? What are you thinking? Put it back, and think about how you'd use a thing that you're buying, and whether that might be dangerous.

## And of course, even then, people will make mistakes. 

Even with that kind of knowledge it's entirely possible to forget to think about these things because they pop up in settings where you simply don't realise you should have taken a moment to think about your use until it's too late.

**Take me, for instance.**

I know my science, but I forgot to take into account that the bin I was using to proof my bread dough (a bin which was not food rated) would, if sat in a warm spot, breathe  DEHP, which would then attach to my dough. That sounds "super dangerous oh my god!" but remember that thinking is important: the doses we're talking about here would require a very long exposure before they'd become a problem.

And of course, that happened. If DEHP landing on my dough had been the only thing to happen then this would still have been perfectly safe, as the bread gets baked at 550F, which is certainly high enough to destroy DEHP; it breaks down into mostly harmless stuff. However, I'd also work the dough by hand during the rising/proofing process, and DEHP dissolves in oils, which your skin is saturate with, so I got a lot more DEHP exposure.

*But even then* the amount that got into my system would have pretty much *still* been safe if I hadn't been making bread almost every day for a month straight. So *finally* we have all the factors necessary to make DEHP actually dangerous. It's a bizarre compounding of factors, but I managed to hit that sweet cocktail of bad decisions and after four weeks of continuous exposure: BAM! Acute eczema of both hands for two weeks.

## ...and making mistakes is fine. As long as you learn from them.

Even with all that, the human body is much more robust than you generally give it credit for. It can recover from the effects of plastics poisoning just fine if you just... stop poisoning yourself: like a rational person, I stopped using that particular bin (while still using plenty of items made of plastic in the kitchen, because they're rated food-safe), my hands recovered, and I've had an excellent learning experience, reminding me to think things through more thoroughly in the future.

And I will be paying more attention to which plastics I use for which purpose for at least the next few years!