Sounds tempting! But, as those who put a little thought into statements will point out, that "$10 item you can make at home for $1!" generally needs something like $100 worth of supplies, so is it worth it?

Let's look at the "Making X at home is way cheaper than buying it pre-made" argument for something relevant to my daily life: french bread. As in real french bread, the kind you buy in a rural boulangerie in France. Your local bakery or supermarket will sell something they call French bread for $2.99, but the kind we're talking about here is more the specialty "artisan baguette" your not-France bakery will happily charge you $5.99 for instead.

I'm going to stay optimistic and pretend that what the supermarket sells is our price target. For the sake of this article. Because outside of the following fictional bit of economics, that's an assumption so shaky you couldn't even set up a game of Jenga! on it.

## Let's look at baguettes

So, a store bought baguette will set you back $2.99, but we can make it at home for something like $0.80. Wow! So cheap! Why would you not?!

Except of course it's not just $0.80 to make at home, you also need all the equipment and ingredients to make baguette at home, and that will cost a fair bit of money. Let's pretend we have nothing in our kitchen. What would the command "go make baguettes at home!" cost us?

### Base equipment:

- $5 for some measuring spoons,
- $15 for some Pyrex measuring cups,
- $10 for a baking tray/sheet,
- $5 for a spray bottle,
- $15 for a very sharp pairing knife (or "lame"),
- $5 for 100' of parchment paper,
- $45 for a decent sized baking stone, or rectangular "pizza" stone (yes, for baguettes this is a basic necessity).

### Optional

These are things that make baking a lot more predictable, and thus more likely to consistently turn out right, instead of baking-blunder:

- $15 for a digital scale,
- $40 for a heating pad,
- $30 for a digital thermostat,
- $25 for a ~27 liter/quart roasting pan,
- $10 for a scraper.

The first is for obvious reasons: measure your ingredients so you always use exactly the same amount, to get the same result.

The latter three improve on that formula by giving you a controlled heating surface for rising your dough on, with the heating pad generating a "I can still put my hand on this" heat, the thermostat regulating when the pad should kick in (to effect a specific temperature), and the roasting pan being a nice large reasonably-sealing non reactive but heat conducting container that you can put on top of the heating pad, with the thermostat's thermometer hung inside the roasting pan.

Done, you can now always rise your dough at exactly the same temperature, whether it's a hot summer's day or a freezing winter morning.

The last item is pretty much to make your life easier when working with dough. You could use a knife, but a scraper's safer, and makes cleaning a little easier, too.

### Tactically optional: a good mixer

Now, if you're going to do all your kneading by hand, add another $10 for a decent mixing bowl, or if you're going the stand mixer route, that's anywhere from $75 to $500 for anything from a shitty to an excellent stand mixer. And I can strongly recommend buying a stand mixer. I remember being poor, and working dough by hand (it's good exercise), but I also remember saving up and getting a mixer and things getting so much easier, and much more reliable. (and not just bread. Many things kitchen related benefit from a stand mixer)

### In summary: 

So our total equipment cost before we've made a single bread varies a little:

- **$135** for the basics
- **$220** for the basics, plus some things that add consistent reproducibility
- **$320** for reproducible basics and a mixer that'll break in a year or two
- **$500** for reproducible basics and a good mixer (like a Kitchenaid Artisan)
- **$850** for reproducible basics and an excellent mixer (like a Kitchenaid Professional)

## Um, you know money isn't free, right?

I know. And I know you're also not made of money. And I completely understand, because I started baking as a student (And the modern kind: I left university about $100k in debt, so yeah: I know what it's like to be poor). However, I'm still going to say "get a Kitchenaid or something similar".

Why? Because we can still do maths: cheap plastic mixers are not capable of mixing dough without overheating their motors and breaking down relatively soon after purchasing. They will last 1 to 2 years tops and over the course of 10 years that's five mixers, and that's idiotic.

For the same amount of money you can buy a high quality mixer with a motor that can deliver the torque necessary to mix dough without overheating, and that comes with a 10 year or even longer warranty, so you can get it replaced, usually for free, if it breaks down from normal wear. Think about this stuff, because it only affects one of the most important aspects of your life: being able to make good, tasty food, fast, instead of having to labour and giving up in favour of shitty food.

You may be poor, but you'll eat well. Or more realistically, you and your house mates will, because you understand the concept of splitting the cost.

## Oh, we also need an oven!

Now, the last one's kind of important since we're discussing baguette: You need to have an oven that can do 260C/500F... if your place of residence doesn't come with one, you could buy one but they're really expensive, so as a student I made sure to rent places that simply came with a decent oven. If you don't have access to an oven, then this is the end of our story: buy store bread. This is the only thing I can't think of a "hack" for. You *might* be able to use a temperature-controllable BBQ as oven substitute, but I'll be honest: I never tried. 

## Right: let's start making bread

Now then, with the matter of equipment settled, we can finally start baking... provided we have the ingredients to do so, so let's buy some.

First point: buy these in bulk, for obvious reasons. Bulk sounds like you might buy more than you'll use in a timely fashion and ingredients might go bad, but if you eat bread a lot (and if you're not Asian, odds are you eat bread a lot), then you'll be fine. 

Now, again: we're going to do some maths, because while baguettes only have four ingredients, the ratios are fairly stable and so we can prime how much we buy of each based on those values: I use 485gr flour, on 9gr salt, on 3gr yeast, on "it doesn't matter how much water because it's near-as-makes-no-difference free, but 250gr, ish ". The total weight ends up being around 750 grams, with a yield of three baguettes of around 250 each.

So what do we buy?

- $10 for a 2kg box of plain table salt, enough for 222 batches. Salt is cheap (well, it is these days).
- $15 for 10kg all purpose flour, enough for 40 batches.
- $10 for 4oz active dry yeast = 120 grams = enough for 40 batches. 

Total supplies cost: I'm going to say $25, because that salt will last you —essentially— as many years as you bought kilograms.

## Maths time!

Now, with all of this written down, when does it become cheaper to "make our own X" as opposed to "buying store-made X", where X is baguettes?

### A ludicrous assumption: we're *only ever* making baguettes.

If the only thing we made were baguettes, then those $25 worth of ingredients will make us 40 batches of 3 baguettes each. That's 120 baguettes. However, these are half-size baguettes because your oven is absolutely not going to be wide enough to make full length baguettes, so effectively we're making the equivalent to 60 store-bought baguettes, and at $3 each that's $180 for store bought, versus $25 for home made.

Net win: $155, with comes out to $3.875 per batch.

And a batch lasts you anywhere between 1 and 3 days depending on your voracity and enthusiasm. You may, of course, end up with stale bread, but that you may also end up making bread pudding. There is no downside, really. Anyway: *great*! This is saving us tons of money!

...But we still need to make back our initial investment, so how many batches do we need to make?  

- $135 for the basics = **35 batches**, or —loosely— counted in months of eating bread: 1–3
- $220 for reproducible basics = **57 batches**, 2–6 months
- $320 for reproducible basics, cheap mixer = **83 batches**, 3–9 months 
- $500 for reproducible basics, good mixer = **129 batches**, 4 months to a year
- $850 for reproducible basics, excellent mixer = **220 batches**... that's enough to use up all our salt over the course of 8 months to 2 years O_O!

So it can take two years to "break even". That's... well that's kind of long, isn't it?

Actually: *no, it's not*. Unless you only have 2 years to live, the kitchen supplies we bought will last far longer than 2 years (unless you bought a shitty mixer. That *will* break down) so we pretty much invariable end up saving money in the long run, with tasty bread at every turn (and as anyone with a sense of money will tell you, the long run is the one that actually makes a difference).

## Better maths time.

But of course, we don't just make bread. All the supplies we bought are things that anyone who cares even slightly about having what they need to do any sort of cooking (especially poor students) will typically end up buying anyway, because there's loads of stuff you use them all for outside of just making bread (... except for the lame, which is why I use an extremely sharp knife and a $10 http://speedysharp.com sharpener). If we sum up all the things we can make with those supplies that we couldn't, without, then the cost-benefit analysis moves that "break even" point closer and closer. 

## In summary

Yes, all those "make X at home" tips cost *lots* in equipment. But if you already have most of the equipment, and you buy those exes often enough, turns out it's usually worth buying the equipment you're missing to make it yourself and very quickly reach the "I am now saving money" point.

That's really all I wanted to point out. Thanks for reading.