[Adobe Lightroom](https://www.adobe.com/products/photoshop-lightroom-classic.html) catalogs are [SQLite3](https://sqlite.org/index.html) files (just with the `.lrcat` extension rather than the typical `.sqlite` or `.db` extensions) and some things that take Lightroom effectively forever can be performed in milliseconds if you're willing to ignore Lightroom entirely and just load the catalog in SQLite3, probably using [an administrative GUI](https://sqlitebrowser.org).

For instance, if you want the list of all filenames for images that haven't been tagged yet, good luck making Lightroom do that. Even with the [user script that some people will tell you to use](http://lightroomsolutions.com/a-quick-list-of-filenames/), actually getting Lightroom to perform this for even a low number of photos in a several thousand photo catalog will take excruciatingly long, whereas the SQLite3 query will probably take less than a second:

```
SELECT
  originalFilename as filename
FROM
  Adobe_images as i,
  AgLibraryFile as f
WHERE
  i.rootFile = f.id_local
AND
  i.id_local NOT IN (
    SELECT DISTINCT(image) as id_local
    FROM AgLibraryKeywordImage
  )
```

Load your catalog, run that query, and done.

There is in fact a lot more that you can do this way, but you might need to do some table hunting: my lightroom catalog has 112 tables, and finding which table houses what information is "half the fun" (read: quite the chore). However, once you've found where to find what, writing a query that just pulls the data you need in exactly the format you need takes very little time, and the amount of time you save for subsequent occasions you need to do the same thing is incredible.

Best of all, you can automate your sqlite. Python, Node, Ruby, all common modern scripting languages can with a sqlite connector, so you can just write a script that loads in the catalog file, runs your query, writes the result to file (or even updates the catalog directly) and all you have to do is execute your script.  And really, that's what we wish Adobe just offered out of the box.

They don't, but because they use Sqlite3, "they do".