In a bizarre happenstance, I rebooted my Windows 10 workstation after doing nothing special in particular, and all my USB devices stopped working. Or rather, they worked fine, until Windows 10 got control of the system.  Not having a keyboard or mouse, I had to remote into my workstation from a different computer, but that revealed that for some reason, the "Intel USB 3.0 eXtensible Host Controller Driver" didn't work. And not because the driver was bad, but because a registry setting was wrong:

> "Windows cannot start this hardware device because its configuration information (in the registry) is incomplete or damaged. (Code 19)

Now, if you Google for this error, you will get a million click-bait articles, and a handful of real posts that tell you to uninstall the device in Device Manager, and then reboot - and of course, that does nothing.

Then some of them tell you to regedit your way to success by deleting the `LowerFilters` and `UpperFilters` keys in the HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE >  System > CurrentControlSet > Control > Class > ... entry, which is invariably for CD-ROM or DVD drives, and that of course does nothing because those are not your problem.

Instead, you need to open HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE >  System > CurrentControlSet > Control > Class, and then simply step through the entries until you find the `USB` entry. In my case, that was `{36fc9e60-c465-11cf-8056-444553540000}` rather than one of the million `{4d36e9xx-e325-11ce-bfc1-xxxxxx}` keys that people tell you to use.

Look at the `LowerFilters` and `UpperFilters` values. Are there any? Delete them. Do they have the wrong case, like `UPPERFILTERS`? Delete them. Just delete them. Then in Device manager, uninstall the host controller and then scan for new hardware.

Presto, you fixed the problem.

And I can only pray that you allowed Remote Desktop connections into your machine, because without that, it's going to be incredibly hard to solve this problem without buying a PS/2 keyboard and/or mouse.  "But I don't have a user password" I hear you say: fret not, [there's a policy edit](https://superuser.com/questions/106917/remote-desktop-without-a-password) for that. "But I have Windows 10 Home Edition" I hear you say...  well then I got nothing for you. I don't even know why that version exists. Upgrade to Pro, then fix the problem, I guess.  And I really do, because I have no way of testing that.

If you use Windows and you're reading this, you should be on Pro. In both senses of the word "should".