# Updating my blog platform

# Updating my blog platform

I updated my blog platform, for reasons. One of them being the current Wordpress shenanigans,  causing the most important person in my life to go "...didn't you have a github-hosted blog? Is that something I can use too?" and while her eventual solution was to discover that I have a Dreamhost account that comes with a free hosted self-managed WP install (so she can stop funding Automaticc), I spent a bunch of time trying to clean up my blog code so it could be used by others again. 

I originally wrote it back in 2014 back when React was still on version 0.12, and revisiting the code it's incredible to see how much nicer React was back then, compared to the monster it has become since. So I decided to rewrite it, but keep it React 0.12, and honest, I wish there was a modern "classic React" library, but JS doesn't stop working this should keep working forever just fine. 

### How does it work?

Some architecture info: my blog platform uses github as its backend, but _it_ uses github as a backend, you don't. It has a simple "swap out post for a markdown editor" interface when you create/edit posts, and when you save your post the client-side code literally posts commits to github, and then github runs its github pages deploy and things just work. Of course, this requires a bit more than just "save your post":

1. the code saves your post text
1. it also saves post metadata like title, created_at, updated_at, tags, etc.
1. it also saves an updated index of all posts in the blog, consisting of only the post id, title, and tags, so that even if you're only looking at a handful (or one) post, it can show you the entire post history as a ToC
1. it also saves an updated RSS.xml file
1. and finally, it saves redirects. Github pages don't come with mod_rewrite or a redirect table, so instead that's done using actual files.

Edits do the same thing, and deletes run those in reverse: all files that got written are committed as "deleted", and the post is stripped from the index so that the index and RSS.xml files no longer include it.

### Making the browser talk to Github

The thing I did really have to update was the GithubAPI connector: back in 2014 there was no official JS API for Github. [Phil Schatz](https://philschatz.com) had just released [octokit](https://philschatz.com/2013/03/10/octokit), using the same name as Github's official API libraries for "not JS" languages, which because [octokat](https://philschatz.com/2014/05/25/octokat/) not too long after once Github realised that maybe it would make sense to offer their octokit library in the language used by the overwhelming majority of web developers so now [octokit is an official Github release](https://www.npmjs.com/package/octokit), but by the time they pulled that trigger, my blog worked and I had no reason to upgrade.

But now I do, and it's frankly a bit of a shit experience, but it works, and it's got support, so... yay? You have three options:

1. use the `requests` based API, where you write http verbs and enpoint URLs. E.g. `await octokit.request(`GET /repos/${user}/${repo}/actions/runs`)`,
1. use the rest API extension, so you can write `await octokit.repos(user, repo).actions.runs()`, or
1. use a plugin if there is one for the exact thing you want, like "uploading a text file without manually running every git step", e.g. `    await octokit.createOrUpdateTextFile({ owner, repo, branch, path: `${this.path}/rss.xml`, content: rss, message: `Update to RSS` });`

For most of this blog's work, the latter is perfectly adequate (although I do [wish it supported createOrUpdateTextFiles`, plural](https://github.com/octokit/plugin-create-or-update-text-file.js/issues/295#issuecomment-2408704495)), so the client-side code simply figures out which files need to be written with what content, and sends those off as commits. Then it uses option 1 to poll the `actions` endpoint to see if the gh pages deploy (which github automatically kicks off without a workflow file - handy!) has finished yet, and colours the admin button red to let you know others won't see your content yet because the website's still rebuilding.

#### "how does it authenticate?"

Auth uses a fine-grained GH token. Another thing that didn't exist back in 2014: you could generate a token and give that commit write access, and good news you just allowed that for every single repo you had access to. It was... insane? It took Github way too long to finally add normal tokens that let you specify exactly which repo(s) it should apply to, but [now that we have those](https://github.com/settings/tokens?type=beta): 

1. you click the admin button
1. you fill in your username, repo name, gh-pages branch, the subdir your gh-weblog content should live in, and that token
1. you are now authenticated and you can use the admin interface. 

And note that that works regardless of whether the token is valid or not: if it's not, nothing you do will actually get saved but you're free to dick around in the admin "interface": it's [an open source blog](https://github.com/pomax/pomax.github.io), what are you going to do, discover that it's actually markdown?

### RSS

It's a blog, it should have RSS. The blog simply grabs the most recent 10 entries, and wraps that in RSS 2.0 XML markup, then sends that off to Github as a regular text file, because it is. Nothing super special there, and because it's just "more gh-pages content" there's nothing else to do. Once the site's redeployed, everyone's RSS feed readers will see the update(s).

### mod_rewrite

Since everything's done through a client-side library, there's a bit of a problem when it comes to "showing a single blog post". Obviously if you want the post feed you just to https://pomax.github.io, but if you want to see, say, this specific post, you can visit https://pomax.github.io/pages/1728925663194/updating-my-blog-platform and that works. Even though it's actually still using https://pomax.github.io with a `?postid=1728925663194/` query argument.

The way this works is that the blog library literally writes a file called `./pages/1728925663194/updating-my-blog-platform/index.html` into the repo to handle the redirect. Here's what's in it:

```html
<meta http-equiv="refresh" content="0; url=../../../index.html?postid=1728925663194">
```

That's it. HTML-based mod_rewrite. Sure, it's more files on the repo, but they're organized extremely obviously, and the blog platform will clean them up if you delete posts, so you click a post link, your browser simply loads a _real html index file_, sees the redirect, and instantly loads the homepage again. 

And then the homepage sees it's supposed to load a single post, runs a `history.replaceState` to make the URL look like the one you actually clicked (which, remember, is a _real URL_ with a real file at that URL) and everything works as you expect.

### image uploads

The one thing I've not re-uplifted is image drag-and-drop so that I can just drag images into my blog posts as I'm writing them. It's not a ton of work, but it's also not trivial, as there are no convenience plugins available for that, so to upload an image "on drop", you need to :

1. create a blob on github
1. get the blob sha
1. create a commit tree for that blob
1. create a commit to put that commit tree into
1. update the head ref to point to that commit
1. then drop the blob sha into the markdown as image code.

Everything in that list is entirely doable but also the kind of pain I'd rather do "in follow-up" compared to holding the new platform deployment.