I'm writing a new "book", this time about implementing a multiplayer mahjong game using JavaScript. I'm writing it in markdown, because that's the lowest effort format to write in, but there aren't a lot of good WYSIWYG, cross-platform standalone markdown editors out there. There's really only kind of one, Typora, and given their business practice of hiding the fact that they were bought by a Chinese company and then kept that under wraps until I pointed out their terms of service are void unless they identify who the owning party is. Within 24 hours the EULA got updated and the issue closed.

So yeah, I'd like to not have an auto-updating application that's installed on my computer with access to everything from networking to file systems, owned by a mystery Chinese company, on my computers. Which leaves me with two options: buy into some "system wide document authoring system" like Obsidian, which is kind of ridiculous if what you want is a standalone markdown editor, or use something like Zettlr, which isn't WYSIWYG, or use something that seems fine until you ask it to load a 50,000 word document, and they suddenly become completely unreliable pieces of software, like Joplin or Bear, where you can't even rely on cursor positioning or undo/redo anymore. 

Kind of important that those work.

So, what are my options? 

1. I am a career programmer
1. I have implemented multiple HTML tokenizers
1. I have written binary format parsers
1. I have a sneaking suspicion this is another one of those...

So yeah, time to just buckle up and write my own markdown editor. Except not, because what I _need_ is a document editor, markdown may be the best storage format because it's human readable and doesn't technically need special tools, but if I'm going to write an editor I want _even less than that_, I want something that lets me write in a way where the format is an underpinning that I don't need to even think about unless I absolutely have to.

Guess what does that already?

That's right: browsers. HTML documents can be editing directly in the browser by using an over 15 year old solution called the `contenteditable` property, which makes content... well, editable. It doesn't come with WYSIWYG functions out of the box, but it _does_ come with APIs for working with the global "Selection" object (which includes the empty selection represented by a cursor in an editable element) as well as "ranges". The combination of these two things let you do stuff like "and then wrap this range in a new tag" or "and then find the word that the cursor is in right now" and all you have to do is write the code that goes "if user presses ctrl-b, wrap the current selection in a strong tag, or if there is no selection, make one consisting of the word the cursor is in. Or, if we're already inside a strong element, unwrap it instead" and that gets you to something that's suspiciously close to a WYSIWYG editor _really_ quickly.

[So I made one](https://pomax.github.io/editable-document-poc)

But there's a problem: editable HTML documents are, unsurprisingly, HTML documents. HTML is not markdown. But we _want_ markdown because (a) we can be super precise if we can work in markdown mode when we need to (which ideally is never, of course, but when we have to, it better be possible), and (b) because tracking changes to a markdown document is just a text diffing thing, whereas tracking changes in an HTML DOM tree is ... less easy.

So, markdown to HTML: easy peazy, we can use [marked](https://marked.js.org). 

HTML to markdown... uh... well there's showdown.js, it's not been maintained for three years now which wouldn't be so bad if it didn't have a bunch of dependencies that are imminently JS-supply-chain-vulnerabilities and the JS supply chain is nothing if not the poster child of supply chain vulnerabilities. So I guess that means I'm writing my own HTML/markdown converter?

Guess we'll see how that goes based on whether the next post is "I've released an HTML/markdown converter" or "I gave up, I'm now using ... as my markdown editor".